


mr.[CHARACTER]
mr.[CHARACTER] believes that his life is a failure and longs for something more. in his efforts to lift his existence out of the daily, monotonous grind it has become, mr.[CHARACTER] develops a far-fetched fantasy about the possibility of a deep friendship between himself and mrs. das. this fantasy reveals just how lonely mr.[CHARACTER]'s life and marriage have become. his arranged marriage is struggling because his wife cannot recover from her grief over the loss of their young son or forgive him for working for the doctor who failed to save their son's life. his career is far less than what he dreamed it might be. he uses his knowledge of english in only the most peripheral way, in high contrast to the dreams of scholarly and diplomatic greatness he once had. in his isolation, he sees mrs. das as a potential kindred spirit because she also languishes in a loveless marriage. he imagines similarities between them that do not exist, yearning to find a friend in this american woman. not surprisingly, the encounter ends in disappointment. when mrs. das does confide in him, he feels only disgust. the intimacy he thought he wanted revolts him when he learns more about mrs. das's nature.


in both of mr.[CHARACTER]'s jobs, as a tour guide and an interpreter for a doctor, he acts as a cultural broker. as a tour guide, he shows mostly english-speaking europeans and americans the sights of india, and in his work as an interpreter, he helps the ailing from another region to communicate with their physician. although neither occupation attains the aspirations of diplomacy he once had, mrs. das helps him view both as important vocations. however, mr.[CHARACTER] is ultimately unable to bridge the cultural gap between himself and mrs. das, whether it stems from strictly national differences or more personal ones. mr.[CHARACTER]'s brief transformation from ordinary tour guide to "romantic" interpreter ends poorly, with his return to the ordinary drudgery of his days.

