the elegant universe

the elegant universe

superstrings, hidden dimensions, and the quest for the ultimate theory

brian greene

w.w. norton & company / new york • london

to my mother and the memory of my father,

with love and gratitude

copyright © 2003, 1999 by brian r. greene

all rights reserved

for information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to

permissions, w. w. norton & company, inc.,

500 fifth avenue, new york, ny 10110.

library of congress cataloging-in-publication data

greene, brian r.

the elegant universe: superstrings, hidden dimensions, and the quest for the ultimate theory / brian r.

greene.
p. cm.

includes bibliographical references.

isbn: 978-0-393-07134-4

1. superstring theories. 2. cosmology. i. title.

qc794.6.s85g75 1999

539.7'258—dc21 98-25695

cip

w. w. norton & company, inc.

500 fifth avenue, new york, n.y. 10110

www.wwnorton.com

w. w. norton & company ltd.

castle house, 75/76 wells street, london w1t 3qt

contents

preface

part i: the edge of knowledge
1. tied up with string

part ii: the dilemma of space, time, and the quanta
2. space, time, and the eye of the beholder
3. of warps and ripples
4. microscopic weirdness
5. the need for a new theory: general relativity vs. quantum mechanics

part iii: the cosmic symphony
6. nothing but music: the essentials of superstring theory
7. the "super" in superstrings
8. more dimensions than meet the eye
9. the smoking gun: experimental signatures

part iv: string theory and the fabric of spacetime
10. quantum geometry
11. tearing the fabric of space
12. beyond strings: in search of m-theory
13. black holes: a string/m-theory perspective
14. reflections on cosmology

part v: unification in the twenty-first century
15. prospects

notes
glossary of scientific terms
references and suggestions for further reading

preface

during the last thirty years of his life, albert einstein sought relentlessly for a so-called unified field
theory—a  theory  capable  of  describing  nature's  forces  within  a  single,  all-encompassing,  coherent
framework. einstein was not motivated by the things we often associate with scientific undertakings,
such  as  trying  to  explain  this  or  that  piece  of  experimental  data.  instead,  he  was  driven  by  a
passionate belief that the deepest understanding of the universe would reveal its truest wonder: the
simplicity  and  power  of  the  principles  on  which  it  is  based.  einstein  wanted  to  illuminate  the
workings of the universe with a clarity never before achieved, allowing us all to stand in awe of its
sheer beauty and elegance.

einstein never realized this dream, in large part because the deck was stacked against him: in his
day, a number of essential features of matter and the forces of nature were either unknown or, at best,
poorly understood. but during the past half-century, physicists of each new generation—through fits
and starts, and diversions down blind alleys—have been building steadily on the discoveries of their
predecessors  to  piece  together  an  ever  fuller  understanding  of  how  the  universe  works. and  now,
long  after  einstein  articulated  his  quest  for  a  unified  theory  but  came  up  empty-handed,  physicists
believe  they  have  finally  found  a  framework  for  stitching  these  insights  together  into  a  seamless
whole—a  single  theory  that,  in  principle,  is  capable  of  describing  all  physical  phenomena.  the
theory, superstring theory, is the subject of this book.

i wrote the elegant universe in an attempt to make the remarkable insights emerging from the
forefront  of  physics  research  accessible  to  a  broad  spectrum  of  readers,  especially  those  with  no
training in mathematics or physics. through public lectures on superstring theory i have given over
the past few years, i have witnessed a widespread yearning to understand what current research says
about the fundamental laws of the universe, how these laws require a monumental restructuring of our
conception of the cosmos, and what challenges lie ahead in the ongoing quest for the ultimate theory. i
hope that, by explaining the major achievements of physics going back to einstein and heisenberg,
and describing how their discoveries have grandly flowered through the breakthroughs of our age,
this book will both enrich and satisfy this curiosity.

i also hope that the elegant universe will be of interest to readers who do have some scientific
background.  for  science  students  and  teachers,  i  hope  this  book  will  crystallize  some  of  the
foundational material of modern physics, such as special relativity, general relativity, and quantum
mechanics, while conveying the contagious excitement of researchers closing in on the long-sought
unified theory. for the avid reader of popular science, i have tried to explain many of the exhilarating
advances in our understanding of the cosmos that have come to light during the last decade. and for
my colleagues in other scientific disciplines, i hope this book will give an honest and balanced sense
of why string theorists are so enthusiastic about the progress being made in the search for the ultimate
theory of nature.

superstring theory casts a wide net. it is a broad and deep subject that draws on many of the
central discoveries in physics. since the theory unifies the laws of the large and of the small, laws
that govern physics out to the farthest reaches of the cosmos and down to the smallest speck of matter,

there  are  many  avenues  by  which  one  can  approach  the  subject.  i  have  chosen  to  focus  on  our
evolving understanding of space and time. i find this to be an especially gripping developmental path,
one  that  cuts  a  rich  and  fascinating  swath  through  the  essential  new  insights.  einstein  showed  the
world that space and time behave in astoundingly unfamiliar ways. now, cutting-edge research has
integrated his discoveries into a quantum universe with numerous hidden dimensions coiled into the
fabric of the cosmos—dimensions whose lavishly entwined geometry may well hold the key to some
of the most profound questions ever posed. although some of these concepts are subtle, we will see
that they can be grasped through down-to-earth analogies. and when these ideas are understood, they
provide a startling and revolutionary perspective on the universe.

throughout this book, i have tried to stay close to the science while giving the reader an intuitive
understanding—often  through  analogy  and  metaphor—of  how  scientists  have  reached  the  current
conception of the cosmos. although i avoid technical language and equations, because of the radically
new concepts involved the reader may need to pause now and then, to mull over a section here or
ponder an explanation there, in order to follow the progression of ideas fully. a few sections of part
iv (focusing on the most recent developments) are a bit more abstract than the rest; i have taken care
to forewarn the reader about these sections and to structure the text so that they can be skimmed or
skipped with minimal impact on the book's logical flow. i have included a glossary of scientific terms
for an easy and accessible reminder of ideas introduced in the main text. although the more casual
reader  may  wish  to  skip  the  endnotes  completely,  the  more  diligent  reader  will  find  in  the  notes
amplifications of points made in the text, clarifications of ideas that have been simplified in the text,
as well as a few technical excursions for those with mathematical training.

i owe thanks to many people for their help during the writing of this book. david steinhardt read
the  manuscript  with  great  care  and  generously  provided  sharp  editorial  insights  and  invaluable
encouragement.  david  morrison,  ken  vineberg,  raphael  kasper,  nicholas  boles,  steven  carlip,
arthur greenspoon, david mermin, michael popowits, and shani offen read the manuscript closely
and  offered  detailed  reactions  and  suggestions  that  greatly  enhanced  the  presentation.  others  who
read all or part of the manuscript and offered advice and encouragement are paul aspinwall, persis
drell, michael duff, kurt gottfried, joshua greene, teddy jefferson, marc kamionkowski, yakov
kanter, andras kovacs, david lee, megan mcewen, nari mistry, hasan padamsee, ronen plesser,
massimo  poratti,  fred  sherry,  lars  straeter,  steven  strogatz,  andrew  strominger,  henry  tye,
cumrun  vafa,  and  gabriele  veneziano.  i  owe  special  thanks  to  raphael  gunner  for,  among  many
other things, his insightful criticisms at an early stage of writing that helped to shape the overall form
of the book, and to robert malley for his gentle but persistent encouragement to go beyond thinking
about  the  book  and  to  put  "pen  to  paper."  steven  weinberg  and  sidney  coleman  offered  valuable
advice  and  assistance,  and  it  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  many  helpful  interactions  with  carol
archer, vicky carstens, david cassel, anne coyle, michael duncan, jane forman, wendy greene,
susan greene, erik jendresen, gary kass, shiva kumar, robert mawhinney, pam morehouse, pierre
ramond, amanda salles, and eero simoncelli. i am indebted to costas efthimiou for his help in fact-
checking and reference-finding, and for turning my initial sketches into line drawings from which tom
rockwell created—with the patience of a saint and a masterful artistic eye—the figures that illustrate
the  text.  i  also  thank  andrew  hanson  and  jim  sethna  for  their  help  in  preparing  a  few  of  the
specialized figures.

for  agreeing  to  be  interviewed  and  to  lend  their  personal  perspectives  on  various  topics
covered  i  thank  howard  georgi,  sheldon  glashow,  michael  green,  john  schwarz,  john  wheeler,
edward witten, and, again, andrew strominger, cumrun vafa, and gabriele veneziano.

i am happy to acknowledge the penetrating insights and invaluable suggestions of angela von
der lippe and the sharp sensitivity to detail of traci nagle, my editors at w. w. norton, both of
whom  significantly  enhanced  the  clarity  of  the  presentation.  i  also  thank  my  literary  agents,  john
brockman and katinka matson, for their expert guidance in shepherding the book from inception to
publication.

for generously supporting my research in theoretical physics for more than a decade and a half, i
gratefully  acknowledge  the  national  science  foundation,  the alfred  p.  sloan  foundation,  and  the
u.s.  department  of  energy.  it  is  perhaps  not  surprising  that  my  own  research  has  focused  on  the
impact  superstring  theory  has  on  our  conception  of  space  and  time,  and  in  a  couple  of  the  later
chapters i describe some of the discoveries in which i had the fortune to take part. although i hope the
reader  will  enjoy  reading  these  "inside"  accounts,  i  realize  that  they  may  leave  an  exaggerated
impression of the role i have played in the development of superstring theory. so let me take this
opportunity to acknowledge the more than one thousand physicists around the world who are crucial
and dedicated participants in the effort to fashion the ultimate theory of the universe. i apologize to all
whose  work  is  not  included  in  this  account;  this  merely  reflects  the  thematic  perspective  i  have
chosen and the length limitations of a general presentation.

finally,  i  owe  heartfelt  thanks  to  ellen archer  for  her  unwavering  love  and  support,  without

which this book would not have been written.

the elegant universe

part i

the edge of knowledge

chapter 1

tied up with string

calling it a cover-up would be far too dramatic. but for more than half a century—even in the midst
of some of the greatest scientific achievements in history—physicists have been quietly aware of a
dark cloud looming on a distant horizon. the problem is this: there are two foundational pillars upon
which modern physics rests. one is albert einstein's general relativity, which provides a theoretical
framework for understanding the universe on the largest of scales: stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies,
and beyond to the immense expanse of the universe itself. the other is quantum mechanics, which
provides a theoretical framework for understanding the universe on the smallest of scales: molecules,
atoms,  and  all  the  way  down  to  subatomic  particles  like  electrons  and  quarks.  through  years  of
research,  physicists  have  experimentally  confirmed  to  almost  unimaginable  accuracy  virtually  all
predictions  made  by  each  of  these  theories.  but  these  same  theoretical  tools  inexorably  lead  to
another  disturbing  conclusion:  as  they  are  currently  formulated,  general  relativity  and  quantum
mechanics cannot  both  be  right.  the  two  theories  underlying  the  tremendous  progress  of  physics
during  the  last  hundred  years—progress  that  has  explained  the  expansion  of  the  heavens  and  the
fundamental structure of matter—are mutually incompatible.

if you have not heard previously about this ferocious antagonism you may be wondering why.
the answer is not hard to come by. in all but the most extreme situations, physicists study things that
are either small and light (like atoms and their constituents) or things that are huge and heavy (like
stars  and  galaxies),  but  not  both.  this  means  that  they  need  use  only  quantum  mechanics or  only
general relativity and can, with a furtive glance, shrug off the barking admonition of the other. for
fifty years this approach has not been quite as blissful as ignorance, but it has been pretty close.

but  the  universe can  be  extreme.  in  the  central  depths  of  a  black  hole  an  enormous  mass  is
crushed to a minuscule size. at the moment of the big bang the whole of the universe erupted from a
microscopic nugget whose size makes a grain of sand look colossal. these are realms that are tiny
and  yet  incredibly  massive,  therefore  requiring  that  both  quantum  mechanics  and  general  relativity
simultaneously be brought to bear. for reasons that will become increasingly clear as we proceed,
the equations of general relativity and quantum mechanics, when combined, begin to shake, rattle, and
gush  with  steam  like  a  red-lined  automobile.  put  less  figuratively,  well-posed  physical  questions
elicit nonsensical answers from the unhappy amalgam of these two theories. even if you are willing
to keep the deep interior of a black hole and the beginning of the universe shrouded in mystery, you
can't help feeling that the hostility between quantum mechanics and general relativity cries out for a
deeper  level  of  understanding.  can  it  really  be  that  the  universe  at  its  most  fundamental  level  is
divided, requiring one set of laws when things are large and a different, incompatible set when things
are small?

superstring theory, a young upstart compared with the venerable edifices of quantum mechanics
and  general  relativity,  answers  with  a  resounding  no.  intense  research  over  the  past  decade  by
physicists and mathematicians around the world has revealed that this new approach to describing

matter  at  its  most  fundamental  level  resolves  the  tension  between  general  relativity  and  quantum
mechanics. in fact, superstring theory shows more: within this new framework, general relativity and
quantum  mechanics require  one  another  for  the  theory  to  make  sense.  according  to  superstring
theory, the marriage of the laws of the large and the small is not only happy but inevitable.

that's part of the good news. but superstring theory—string theory, for short—takes this union
one giant step further. for three decades, einstein sought a unified theory of physics, one that would
interweave  all  of  nature's  forces  and  material  constituents  within  a  single  theoretical  tapestry.  he
failed. now, at the dawn of the new millennium, proponents of string theory claim that the threads of
this elusive unified tapestry finally have been revealed. string theory has the potential to show that all
of the wondrous happenings in the universe—from the frantic dance of subatomic quarks to the stately
waltz of orbiting binary stars, from the primordial fireball of the big bang to the majestic swirl of
heavenly galaxies—are reflections of one grand physical principle, one master equation.

because these features of string theory require that we drastically change our understanding of
space, time, and matter, they will take some time to get used to, to sink in at a comfortable level. but
as shall become clear, when seen in its proper context, string theory emerges as a dramatic yet natural
outgrowth of the revolutionary discoveries of physics during the past hundred years. in fact, we shall
see that the conflict between general relativity and quantum mechanics is actually not the first, but the
third in a sequence of pivotal conflicts encountered during the past century, each of whose resolution
has resulted in a stunning revision of our understanding of the universe.

the three conflicts

the first conflict, recognized as far back as the late 1800s, concerns puzzling properties of the motion
of light. briefly put, according to isaac newton's laws of motion, if you run fast enough you can catch
up  with  a  departing  beam  of  light,  whereas  according  to  james  clerk  maxwell's  laws  of
electromagnetism, you can't. as we will discuss in chapter 2, einstein resolved this conflict through
his theory of special relativity, and in so doing completely overturned our understanding of space and
time.  according  to  special  relativity,  no  longer  can  space  and  time  be  thought  of  as  universal
concepts  set  in  stone,  experienced  identically  by  everyone.  rather,  space  and  time  emerged  from
einstein's reworking as malleable constructs whose form and appearance depend on one's state of
motion.

the  development  of  special  relativity  immediately  set  the  stage  for  the  second  conflict.  one
conclusion of einstein's work is that no object—in fact, no influence or disturbance of any sort—can
travel faster than the speed of light. but, as we shall discuss in chapter 3, newton's experimentally
successful  and  intuitively  pleasing  universal  theory  of  gravitation  involves  influences  that  are
transmitted over vast distances of space instantaneously. it was einstein, again, who stepped in and
resolved  the  conflict  by  offering  a  new  conception  of  gravity  with  his  1915  general  theory  of
relativity. just as special relativity overturned previous conceptions of space and time, so too did
general relativity. not only are space and time influenced by one's state of motion, but they can warp
and curve in response to the presence of matter or energy. such distortions to the fabric of space and
time,  as  we  shall  see,  transmit  the  force  of  gravity  from  one  place  to  another.  space  and  time,
therefore, can no longer to be thought of as an inert backdrop on which the events of the universe play
themselves  out;  rather,  through  special  and  then  general  relativity,  they  are  intimate  players  in  the
events themselves.

once again the pattern repeated itself: the discovery of general relativity, while resolving one
conflict, led to another. over the course of the three decades beginning in 1900, physicists developed
quantum mechanics (discussed in chapter 4) in response to a number of glaring problems that arose
when  nineteenth-century  conceptions  of  physics  were  applied  to  the  microscopic  world.  and  as
mentioned  above,  the  third  and  deepest  conflict  arises  from  the  incompatibility  between  quantum
mechanics and general relativity. as we will see in chapter 5, the gently curving geometrical form of
space  emerging  from  general  relativity  is  at  loggerheads  with  the  frantic,  roiling,  microscopic
behavior of the universe implied by quantum mechanics. as it was not until the mid-1980s that string
theory  offered  a  resolution,  this  conflict  is  rightly  called  the  central  problem  of  modern  physics.
moreover, building on special and general relativity, string theory requires its own severe revamping
of our conceptions of space and time. for example, most of us take for granted that our universe has
three spatial dimensions. but this is not so according to string theory, which claims that our universe
has many more dimensions than meet the eye—dimensions that are tightly curled into the folded fabric
of the cosmos. so central are these remarkable insights into the nature of space and time that we shall
use them as a guiding theme in all that follows. string theory, in a real sense, is the story of space and
time since einstein.

to appreciate what string theory actually is, we need to take a step back and briefly describe

what we have learned during the last century about the microscopic structure of the universe.

the universe at its smallest: what we know about matter

the  ancient  greeks  surmised  that  the  stuff  of  the  universe  was  made  up  of  tiny  "uncuttable"
ingredients that they called atoms. just as the enormous number of words in an alphabetic language is
built up from the wealth of combinations of a small number of letters, they guessed that the vast range
of  material  objects  might  also  result  from  combinations  of  a  small  number  of  distinct,  elementary
building blocks. it was a prescient guess. more than 2,000 years later we still believe it to be true,
although  the  identity  of  the  most  fundamental  units  has  gone  through  numerous  revisions.  in  the
nineteenth century scientists showed that many familiar substances such as oxygen and carbon had a
smallest recognizable constituent; following in the tradition laid down by the greeks, they called them
atoms. the name stuck, but history has shown it to be a misnomer, since atoms surely are "cuttable."
by the early 1930s the collective works of j. j. thomson, ernest rutherford, niels bohr, and james
chadwick had established the solar system–like atomic model with which most of us are familiar. far
from being the most elementary material constituent, atoms consist of a nucleus, containing protons
and neutrons, that is surrounded by a swarm of orbiting electrons.

for  a  while  many  physicists  thought  that  protons,  neutrons,  and  electrons  were  the  greeks'
"atoms."  but  in  1968  experimenters  at  the  stanford  linear accelerator  center,  making  use  of  the
increased capacity of technology to probe the microscopic depths of matter, found that protons and
neutrons are not fundamental, either. instead they showed that each consists of three smaller particles,
called quarks—a  whimsical  name  taken  from  a  passage  in  james  joyce's finnegans  wake  by  the
theoretical  physicist  murray  gell-mann,  who  previously  had  surmised  their  existence.  the
experimenters confirmed that quarks themselves come in two varieties, which were named, a bit less
creatively, up and down. a proton consists of two up-quarks and a down-quark; a neutron consists of
two down-quarks and an up-quark.

everything  you  see  in  the  terrestrial  world  and  the  heavens  above  appears  to  be  made  from

combinations of electrons, up-quarks, and down-quarks. no experimental evidence indicates that any
of these three particles is built up from something smaller. but a great deal of evidence indicates that
the  universe  itself  has  additional  particulate  ingredients.  in  the  mid-1950s,  frederick  reines  and
clyde cowan found conclusive experimental evidence for a fourth kind of fundamental particle called
a  neutrino—a  particle  whose  existence  was  predicted  in  the  early  1930s  by  wolfgang  pauli.
neutrinos proved very difficult to find because they are ghostly particles that only rarely interact with
other  matter:  an  average-energy  neutrino  can  easily  pass  right  through  many  trillion  miles  of  lead
without the slightest effect on its motion. this should give you significant relief, because right now as
you read this, billions of neutrinos ejected into space by the sun are passing through your body and the
earth as well, as part of their lonely journey through the cosmos. in the late 1930s, another particle
called  a muon—identical  to  an  electron  except  that  a  muon  is  about  200  times  heavier—was
discovered by physicists studying cosmic rays (showers of particles that bombard earth from outer
space). because there was nothing in the cosmic order, no unsolved puzzle, no tailor-made niche, that
necessitated  the  muon's  existence,  the  nobel  prize–winning  particle  physicist  isidor  isaac  rabi
greeted the discovery of the muon with a less than enthusiastic "who ordered that?" nevertheless,
there it was. and more was to follow.

using ever more powerful technology, physicists have continued to slam bits of matter together
with  ever  increasing  energy,  momentarily  recreating  conditions  unseen  since  the  big  bang.  in  the
debris they have searched for new fundamental ingredients to add to the growing list of particles.
here  is  what  they  have  found:  four  more  quarks—charm,  strange,  bottom,  and top—and  another
even  heavier  cousin  of  the  electron,  called  a tau,  as  well  as  two  other  particles  with  properties
similar  to  the  neutrino  (called  the muon-neutrino  and tau-neutrino  to  distinguish  them  from  the
original  neutrino,  now  called  the electron-neutrino).  these  particles  are  produced  through  high-
energy  collisions  and  exist  only  ephemerally;  they  are  not  constituents  of  anything  we  typically
encounter. but even this is not quite the end of the story. each of these particles has an antiparticle
partner—a particle of identical mass but opposite in certain other respects such as its electric charge
(as well as its charges with respect to other forces discussed below). for instance, the antiparticle of
an electron is called a positron—it has exactly the same mass as an electron, but its electric charge is
+1  whereas  the  electric  charge  of  the  electron  is  -1.  when  in  contact,  matter  and  antimatter  can
annihilate one another to produce pure energy—that's why there is extremely little naturally occurring
antimatter in the world around us.

physicists have recognized a pattern among these particles, displayed in table 1.1. the matter
particles neatly fall into three groups, which are often called families. each family contains two of
the  quarks,  an  electron  or  one  of  its  cousins,  and  one  of  the  neutrino  species.  the  corresponding
particle types across the three families have identical properties except for their mass, which grows
larger in each successive family. the upshot is that physicists have now probed the structure of matter
to scales of about a billionth of a billionth of a meter and shown that everything encountered to date
—whether it occurs naturally or is produced artificially with giant atom-smashers—consists of some
combination of particles from these three families and their antimatter partners.

a  glance  at  table  1.1  will  no  doubt  leave  you  with  an  even  stronger  sense  of  rabi's
bewilderment  at  the  discovery  of  the  muon.  the  arrangement  into  families  at  least  gives  some
semblance  of  order,  but  innumerable  "whys"  leap  to  the  fore.  why  are  there  so  many  fundamental
particles, especially when it seems that the great majority of things in the world around us need only
electrons, up-quarks, and down-quarks? why are there three families? why not one family or four
families or any other number? why do the particles have a seemingly random spread of masses—

why, for in-

stance, does the tau weigh about 3,520 times as much as an electron? why does the top quark
weigh about 40,200 times as much an up-quark? these are such strange, seemingly random numbers.
did they occur by chance, by some divine choice, or is there a comprehensible scientific explanation
for these fundamental features of our universe?

table 1.1 the three families of fundamental particles and their masses (in multiples of the proton
mass). the values of the neutrino masses have so far eluded experimental determination.

the forces, or, where's the photon?

things only become more complicated when we consider the forces of nature. the world around us is
replete  with  means  of  exerting  influence:  balls  can  be  hit  with  bats,  bungee  enthusiasts  can  throw
themselves earthward from high platforms, magnets can keep superfast trains suspended just above
metallic  tracks,  geiger  counters  can  tick  in  response  to  radioactive  material,  nuclear  bombs  can
explode.  we  can  influence  objects  by  vigorously  pushing,  pulling,  or  shaking  them;  by  hurling  or
firing  other  objects  into  them;  by  stretching,  twisting,  or  crushing  them;  or  by  freezing,  heating,  or
burning them. during the past hundred years physicists have accumulated mounting evidence that all
of  these  interactions  between  various  objects  and  materials,  as  well  as  any  of  the  millions  upon
millions of others encountered daily, can be reduced to combinations of four fundamental forces. one
of these is the gravitational force. the other three are the electromagnetic force, the weak force, and
the strong force.

gravity is the most familiar of the forces, being responsible for keeping us in orbit around the
sun as well as for keeping our feet firmly planted on earth. the mass of an object measures how much
gravitational force it can exert as well as feel. the electromagnetic force is the next most familiar of
the  four.  it  is  the  force  driving  all  of  the  conveniences  of  modern  life—lights,  computers,  tvs,
telephones—and  underlies  the  awesome  might  of  lightning  storms  and  the  gentle  touch  of  a  human
hand. microscopically, the electric charge of a particle plays the same role for the electromagnetic
force as mass does for gravity: it determines how strongly the particle can exert as well as respond
electromagnetically.

the strong and the weak forces are less familiar because their strength rapidly diminishes over
all  but  subatomic  distance  scales;  they  are  the  nuclear  forces.  this  is  why  these  two  forces  were
discovered  only  much  more  recently.  the  strong  force  is  responsible  for  keeping  quarks  "glued"
together inside of protons and neutrons and keeping protons and neutrons tightly crammed together
inside atomic nuclei. the weak force is best known as the force responsible for the radioactive decay

of substances such as uranium and cobalt.

during the past century, physicists have found two features common to all these forces. first, as
we will discuss in chapter 5, at a microscopic level all the forces have an associated particle that
you can think of as being the smallest packet or bundle of the force. if you fire a laser beam—an
"electromagnetic  ray  gun"—you  are  firing  a  stream  of photons,  the  smallest  bundles  of  the
electromagnetic  force.  similarly,  the  smallest  constituents  of  weak  and  strong  force  fields  are
particles  called weak gauge bosons  and gluons.  (the  name gluon is particularly descriptive: you
can think of gluons as the microscopic ingredient in the strong glue holding atomic nuclei together.)
by 1984 experimenters had definitively established the existence and the detailed properties of these
three kinds of force particles, recorded in table 1.2. physicists believe that the gravitational force
also  has  an  associated  particle—the  graviton—but  its  existence  has  yet  to  be  confirmed
experimentally.

the second common feature of the forces is that just as mass determines how gravity affects a
particle,  and  electric  charge  determines  how  the  electromagnetic  force  affects  it,  particles  are
endowed  with  certain  amounts  of  "strong  charge"  and  "weak  charge"  that  determine  how  they  are
affected by the strong and weak forces. (these properties are detailed in the table in the endnotes to
this chapter.1) but as with particle masses, beyond the fact that experimental physicists have carefully
measured  these  properties,  no  one  has  any  explanation  of why  our  universe  is  composed  of  these
particular particles, with these particular masses and force charges.

force particle
force
strong
gluon
electromagnetic photon
weak
gravity

weak gauge
bosons
graviton

mass
0
0
86,
97
0

table 1.2 the four forces of nature, together with their associated force particles and their masses in
multiples  of  the  proton  mass.  (the  weak  force  particles  come  in  varieties  with  the  two  possible
masses listed. theoretical studies show that the graviton should be massless.)

notwithstanding  their  common  features,  an  examination  of  the  fundamental  forces  themselves
serves only to compound the questions. why, for instance, are there four fundamental forces? why not
five or three or perhaps only one? why do the forces have such different properties? why are the
strong  and  weak  forces  confined  to  operate  on  microscopic  scales  while  gravity  and  the
electromagnetic  force  have  an  unlimited  range  of  influence? and  why  is  there  such  an  enormous
spread in the intrinsic strength of these forces?

to  appreciate  this  last  question,  imagine  holding  an  electron  in  your  left  hand  and  another
electron  in  your  right  hand  and  bringing  these  two  identical  electrically  charged  particles  close
together.  their  mutual  gravitational  attraction  will  favor  their  getting  closer  while  their
electromagnetic repulsion will try to drive them apart. which is stronger? there is no contest: the
electromagnetic repulsion is about a million billion billion billion billion (1042)  times  stronger!  if
your right bicep represents the strength of the gravitational force, then your left bicep would have to

extend beyond the edge of the known universe to represent the strength of the electromagnetic force.
the  only  reason  the  electromagnetic  force  does  not  completely  overwhelm  gravity  in  the  world
around  us  is  that  most  things  are  composed  of  an  equal  amount  of  positive  and  negative  electric
charges whose forces cancel each other out. on the other hand, since gravity is always attractive,
there are no analogous cancellations—more stuff means greater gravitational force. but fundamentally
speaking, gravity is an extremely feeble force. (this fact accounts for the difficulty in experimentally
confirming  the  existence  of  the  graviton.  searching  for  the  smallest  bundle  of  the  feeblest  force  is
quite a challenge.) experiments also have shown that the strong force is about one hundred times as
strong as the electromagnetic force and about one hundred thousand times as strong as the weak force.
but where is the rationale—the raison d'être—for our universe having these features?

this is not a question born of idle philosophizing about why certain details happen to be one
way instead of another; the universe would be a vastly different place if the properties of the matter
and force particles were even moderately changed. for example, the existence of the stable nuclei
forming the hundred or so elements of the periodic table hinges delicately on the ratio between the
strengths of the strong and electromagnetic forces. the protons crammed together in atomic nuclei all
repel  one  another  electromagnetically;  the  strong  force  acting  among  their  constituent  quarks,
thankfully, overcomes this repulsion and tethers the protons tightly together. but a rather small change
in  the  relative  strengths  of  these  two  forces  would  easily  disrupt  the  balance  between  them,  and
would cause most atomic nuclei to disintegrate. furthermore, were the mass of the electron a few
times greater than it is, electrons and protons would tend to combine to form neutrons, gobbling up the
nuclei of hydrogen (the simplest element in the cosmos, with a nucleus containing a single proton)
and,  again,  disrupting  the  production  of  more  complex  elements.  stars  rely  upon  fusion  between
stable nuclei and would not form with such alterations to fundamental physics. the strength of the
gravitational force also plays a formative role. the crushing density of matter in a star's central core
powers  its  nuclear  furnace  and  underlies  the  resulting  blaze  of  starlight.  if  the  strength  of  the
gravitational force were increased, the stellar clump would bind more strongly, causing a significant
increase in the rate of nuclear reactions. but just as a brilliant flare exhausts its fuel much faster than a
slow-burning candle, an increase in the nuclear reaction rate would cause stars like the sun to burn
out far more quickly, having a devastating effect on the formation of life as we know it. on the other
hand,  were  the  strength  of  the  gravitational  force  significantly  decreased,  matter  would  not  clump
together at all, thereby preventing the formation of stars and galaxies.

we could go on, but the idea is clear: the universe is the way it is because the matter and the
force particles have the properties they do. but is there a scientific explanation for why they have
these properties?

string theory: the basic idea

string  theory  offers  a  powerful  conceptual  paradigm  in  which,  for  the  first  time,  a  framework  for
answering these questions has emerged. let's first get the basic idea.

the particles in table 1.1 are the "letters" of all matter. just like their linguistic counterparts,
they appear to have no further internal substructure. string theory proclaims otherwise. according to
string  theory,  if  we  could  examine  these  particles  with  even  greater  precision—a  precision  many
orders  of  magnitude  beyond  our  present  technological  capacity—we  would  find  that  each  is  not
pointlike, but instead consists of a tiny one-dimensional loop. like an infinitely thin rubber band, each

particle contains a vibrating, oscillating, dancing filament that physicists, lacking gell-mann's literary
flair, have named a string. in figure 1.1 we illustrate this essential idea of string theory by starting
with  an  ordinary  piece  of  matter,  an  apple,  and  repeatedly  magnifying  its  structure  to  reveal  its
ingredients on ever smaller scales. string theory adds the new microscopic layer of a vibrating loop
to the previously known progression from atoms through protons, neutrons, electrons and quarks.2

although it is by no means obvious, we will see in chapter 6 that this simple replacement of
point-particle  material  constituents  with  strings  resolves  the  incompatibility  between  quantum
mechanics  and  general  relativity.  string  theory  thereby  unravels  the  central  gordian  knot  of
contemporary theoretical physics. this is a tremendous achievement, but it is only part of the reason
string theory has generated such excitement.

figure  1.1  matter  is  composed  of  atoms,  which  in  turn  are  made  from  quarks  and  electrons.
according to string theory, all such particles are actually tiny loops of vibrating string.

string theory as the unified theory of everything

in  einstein's  day,  the  strong  and  the  weak  forces  had  not  yet  been  discovered,  but  he  found  the
existence of even two distinct forces—gravity and electromagnetism—deeply troubling. einstein did
not accept that nature is founded on such an extravagant design. this launched his thirty-year voyage
in search of the so-called unified field theory that he hoped would show that these two forces are
really manifestations of one grand underlying principle. this quixotic quest isolated einstein from the
mainstream  of  physics,  which,  understandably,  was  far  more  excited  about  delving  into  the  newly
emerging framework of quantum mechanics. he wrote to a friend in the early 1940s, "i have become a
lonely  old  chap  who  is  mainly  known  because  he  doesn't  wear  socks  and  who  is  exhibited  as  a
curiosity on special occasions."3

einstein was simply ahead of his time. more than half a century later, his dream of a unified
theory  has  become  the  holy  grail  of  modern  physics.  and  a  sizeable  part  of  the  physics  and
mathematics  community  is  becoming  increasingly  convinced  that  string  theory  may  provide  the
answer. from one principle—that everything at its most microscopic level consists of combinations
of vibrating strands—string theory provides a single explanatory framework capable of encompassing
all forces and all matter.

string theory proclaims, for instance, that the observed particle properties, the data summarized

in tables 1.1 and 1.2, are a reflection of the various ways in which a string can vibrate. just as the
strings on a violin or on a piano have resonant frequencies at which they prefer to vibrate—patterns
that our ears sense as various musical notes and their higher harmonics—the same holds true for the
loops of string theory. but we will see that, rather than producing musical notes, each of the preferred
patterns of vibration of a string in string theory appears as a particle whose mass and force charges
are determined by the string's oscillatory pattern. the electron is a string vibrating one way, the up-
quark is a string vibrating another way, and so on. far from being a collection of chaotic experimental
facts, particle properties in string theory are the manifestation of one and the same physical feature:
the resonant patterns of vibration—the music, so to speak—of fundamental loops of string. the same
idea applies to the forces of nature as well. we will see that force particles are also associated with
particular patterns of string vibration and hence everything, all matter and all forces, is unified under
the same rubric of microscopic string oscillations—the "notes" that strings can play.

for the first time in the history of physics we therefore have a framework with the capacity to
explain  every  fundamental  feature  upon  which  the  universe  is  constructed.  for  this  reason  string
theory is sometimes described as possibly being the "theory of everything" (t.o.e.) or the "ultimate"
or "final" theory. these grandiose descriptive terms are meant to signify the deepest possible theory
of physics—a theory that underlies all others, one that does not require or even allow for a deeper
explanatory base. in practice, many string theorists take a more down-to-earth approach and think of a
t.o.e.  in  the  more  limited  sense  of  a  theory  that  can  explain  the  properties  of  the  fundamental
particles and the properties of the forces by which they interact and influence one another. a staunch
reductionist would claim that this is no limitation at all, and that in principle absolutely everything,
from  the  big  bang  to  daydreams,  can  be  described  in  terms  of  underlying  microscopic  physical
processes  involving  the  fundamental  constituents  of  matter.  if  you  understand  everything  about  the
ingredients, the reductionist argues, you understand everything.

the  reductionist  philosophy  easily  ignites  heated  debate.  many  find  it  fatuous  and  downright
repugnant  to  claim  that  the  wonders  of  life  and  the  universe  are  mere  reflections  of  microscopic
particles engaged in a pointless dance fully choreographed by the laws of physics. is it really the case
that feelings of joy, sorrow, or boredom are nothing but chemical reactions in the brain—reactions
between molecules and atoms that, even more microscopically, are reactions between some of the
particles in table 1.1, which are really just vibrating strings? in response to this line of criticism,
nobel laureate steven weinberg cautions in dreams of a final theory,

at the other end of the spectrum are the opponents of reductionism who are appalled by
what they feel to be the bleakness of modern science. to whatever extent they and their
world  can  be  reduced  to  a  matter  of  particles  or  fields  and  their  interactions,  they  feel
diminished by that knowledge. . .. i would not try to answer these critics with a peptalk
about  the  beauties  of  modern  science.  the  reductionist  worldview is  chilling  and
impersonal. it has to be accepted as it is, not because we like it, but because that is the way
the world works.4

some agree with this stark view, some don't.

others have tried to argue that developments such as chaos theory tell us that new kinds of laws
come into play when the level of complexity of a system increases. understanding the behavior of an
electron or a quark is one thing; using this knowledge to understand the behavior of a tornado is quite
another. on this point, most agree. but opinions diverge on whether the diverse and often unexpected

phenomena  that  can  occur  in  systems  more  complex  than  individual  particles  truly  represent  new
physical principles at work, or whether the principles involved are derivative, relying, albeit in a
terribly  complicated  way,  on  the  physical  principles  governing  the  enormously  large  number  of
elementary constituents. my own feeling is that they do not represent new and independent laws of
physics. although it would be hard to explain the properties of a tornado in terms of the physics of
electrons and quarks, i see this as a matter of calculational impasse, not an indicator of the need for
new physical laws. but again, there are some who disagree with this view.

what is largely beyond question, and is of primary importance to the journey described in this
book, is that even if one accepts the debatable reasoning of the staunch reductionist, principle is one
thing  and  practice  quite  another. almost  everyone  agrees  that  finding  the  t.o.e.  would  in  no  way
mean that psychology, biology, geology, chemistry, or even physics had been solved or in some sense
subsumed. the universe is such a wonderfully rich and complex place that the discovery of the final
theory, in the sense we are describing here, would not spell the end of science. quite the contrary:
the discovery of the t.o.e.—the ultimate explanation of the universe at its most microscopic level, a
theory that does not rely on any deeper explanation—would provide the firmest foundation on which
to build  our  understanding  of  the  world.  its  discovery  would  mark  a  beginning,  not  an  end.  the
ultimate theory would provide an unshakable pillar of coherence forever assuring us that the universe
is a comprehensible place.

the state of string theory

the central concern of this book is to explain the workings of the universe according to string theory,
with a primary emphasis on the implications that these results have for our understanding of space and
time. unlike many other exposes of scientific developments, the one given here does not address itself
to a theory that has been completely worked out, confirmed by vigorous experimental tests, and fully
accepted by the scientific community. the reason for this, as we will discuss in subsequent chapters,
is  that  string  theory  is  such  a  deep  and  sophisticated  theoretical  structure  that  even  with  the
impressive progress that has been made over the last two decades, we still have far to go before we
can claim to have achieved full mastery.

and  so  string  theory  should  be  viewed  as  a  work  in  progress  whose  partial  completion  has
already revealed astonishing insights into the nature of space, time, and matter. the harmonious union
of  general  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics  is  a  major  success.  furthermore,  unlike  any  previous
theory, string theory has the capacity to answer primordial questions having to do with nature's most
fundamental constituents and forces. of equal importance, although somewhat harder to convey, is the
remarkable elegance of both the answers and the framework for answers that string theory proposes.
for instance, in string theory many aspects of nature that might appear to be arbitrary technical details
—such as the number of distinct fundamental particle ingredients and their respective properties—are
found to arise from essential and tangible aspects of the geometry of the universe. if string theory is
right, the microscopic fabric of our universe is a richly intertwined multidimensional labyrinth within
which the strings of the universe endlessly twist and vibrate, rhythmically beating out the laws of the
cosmos. far from being accidental details, the properties of nature's basic building blocks are deeply
entwined with the fabric of space and time.

in the final analysis, though, nothing is a substitute for definitive, testable predictions that can
determine whether string theory has truly lifted the veil of mystery hiding the deepest truths of our

universe.  it  may  be  some  time  before  our  level  of  comprehension  has  reached  sufficient  depth  to
achieve this aim, although, as we will discuss in chapter 9, experimental tests could provide strong
circumstantial support for string theory within the next ten years or so. moreover, in chapter 13 we
will  see  that  string  theory  has  recently  solved  a  central  puzzle  concerning  black  holes,  associated
with  the  so-called  bekenstein-hawking  entropy,  that  has  stubbornly  resisted  resolution  by  more
conventional  means  for  more  than  twenty-five  years.  this  success  has  convinced  many  that  string
theory is in the process of giving us our deepest understanding of how the universe works.

edward witten, one of the pioneers and leading experts in string theory, summarizes the situation
by  saying  that  "string  theory  is  a  part  of  twenty-first-century  physics  that  fell  by  chance  into  the
twentieth century," an assessment first articulated by the celebrated italian physicist daniele amati. 5
in  a  sense,  then,  it  is  as  if  our  forebears  in  the  late  nineteenth  century  had  been  presented  with  a
modern-day supercomputer, without the operating instructions. through inventive trial and error, hints
of  the  supercomputer's  power  would  have  become  evident,  but  it  would  have  taken  vigorous  and
prolonged effort to gain true mastery. the hints of the computer's potential, like our glimpses of string
theory's explanatory power, would have provided extremely strong motivation for obtaining complete
facility. a similar motivation today energizes a generation of theoretical physicists to pursue a full
and precise analytic understanding of string theory.

witten's remark and those of other experts in the field indicate that it could be decades or even
centuries before string theory is fully developed and understood. this may well be true. in fact, the
mathematics of string theory is so complicated that, to date, no one even knows the exact equations of
the theory. instead, physicists know only approximations to these equations, and even the approximate
equations  are  so  complicated  that  they  as  yet  have  been  only  partially  solved.  nevertheless,  an
inspiring  set  of  breakthroughs  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s—breakthroughs  that  have  answered
theoretical  questions  of  hitherto  unimaginable  difficulty—may  well  indicate  that  complete
quantitative understanding of string theory is much closer than initially thought. physicists worldwide
are developing powerful new techniques to transcend the numerous approximate methods so far used,
collectively piecing together disparate elements of the string theory puzzle at an exhilarating rate.

surprisingly, these developments are providing new vantage points for reinterpreting some of
the basic aspects of the theory that have been in place for some time. for instance, a natural question
that may have occurred to you in looking at figure 1.1 is, why strings? why not little frisbee disks?
or microscopic bloblike nuggets? or a combination of all of these possibilities? as we shall see in
chapter 12, the most recent insights show that these other kinds of ingredients do have an important
role in string theory, and have revealed that string theory is actually part of an even grander synthesis
currently (and mysteriously) named m-theory. these latest developments will be the subject of the
final chapters of this book.

progress in science proceeds in fits and starts. some periods are filled with great breakthroughs;
at other times researchers experience dry spells. scientists put forward results, both theoretical and
experimental. the results are debated by the community, sometimes they are discarded, sometimes
they  are  modified,  and  sometimes  they  provide  inspirational  jumping-off  points  for  new  and  more
accurate ways of understanding the physical universe. in other words, science proceeds along a zig
zag  path  toward  what  we  hope  will  be  ultimate  truth,  a  path  that  began  with  humanity's  earliest
attempts  to  fathom  the  cosmos  and  whose  end  we  cannot  predict.  whether  string  theory  is  an
incidental rest stop along this path, a landmark turning point, or in fact the final destination we do not
know. but the last two decades of research by hundreds of dedicated physicists and mathematicians
from numerous countries have given us well-founded hope that we are on the right and possibly final

track.

it is a telling testament of the rich and far-reaching nature of string theory that even our present
level of understanding has allowed us to gain striking new insights into the workings of the universe.
a central thread in what follows will be those developments that carry forward the revolution in our
understanding of space and time initiated by einstein's special and general theories of relativity. we
will see that if string theory is correct, the fabric of our universe has properties that would likely have
dazzled even einstein.

part ii

the dilemma of space, time, and the quanta

chapter 2

space, time, and the eye of the beholder

in june 1905, twenty-six-year-old albert einstein submitted a technical article to the german annals
of  physics  in  which  he  came  to  grips  with  a  paradox  about  light  that  had  first  troubled  him  as  a
teenager, some ten years earlier. upon turning the final page of einstein's manuscript, the editor of the
journal, max planck, realized that the accepted scientific order had been overthrown. without hoopla
or fanfare, a patent clerk from bern, switzerland, had completely overturned the traditional notions of
space  and  time  and  replaced  them  with  a  new  conception  whose  properties  fly  in  the  face  of
everything we are familiar with from common experience.

the paradox that had troubled einstein for a decade was this. in the mid-1800s, after a close
study of the experimental work of the english physicist michael faraday, the scottish physicist james
clerk  maxwell  succeeded  in  uniting  electricity  and  magnetism  in  the  framework  of  the
electromagnetic  field.  if  you've  ever  been  on  a  mountaintop  just  before  a  severe  thunderstorm  or
stood close to a van de graaf generator, you have a visceral sense of what an electromagnetic field
is, because you've felt it. in case you haven't, it is somewhat like a tide of electric and magnetic lines
of force that permeate a region of space through which they pass. when you sprinkle iron filings near
a magnet, for example, the orderly pattern they form traces out some of the invisible lines of magnetic
force. when you take off a wool sweater on an especially dry day and hear a crackling sound and
perhaps  feel  a  momentary  shock  or  two,  you  are  witnessing  evidence  of  electric  lines  of  force
generated by electric charges swept up by the fibers in your sweater. beyond uniting these and all
other electric and magnetic phenomena in one mathematical framework, maxwell's theory showed—
quite unexpectedly—that electromagnetic disturbances travel at a fixed and never-changing speed, a
speed  that  turns  out  to  equal  that  of  light.  from  this,  maxwell  realized  that  visible  light  itself  is
nothing but a particular kind of electromagnetic wave, one that is now understood to interact with
chemicals in the retina, giving rise to the sensation of sight. moreover (and this is crucial), maxwell's
theory also showed that all electromagnetic waves—visible light among them—are the epitome of the
peripatetic traveler. they never stop. they never slow down. light always travels at light speed.

all  is  well  and  good  until  we  ask,  as  the  sixteen-year-old  einstein  did,  what  happens  if  we
chase after a beam of light, at light speed? intuitive reasoning, rooted in newton's laws of motion,
tells us that we will catch up with the light waves and so they will appear stationary; light will stand
still. but according to maxwell's theory, and all reliable observations, there is simply no such thing
as stationary light: no one has ever held a stationary clump of light in the palm of his or her hand.
hence the problem. luckily, einstein was unaware that many of the world's leading physicists were
struggling  with  this  question  (and  were  heading  down  many  a  spurious  path)  and  pondered  the
paradox of maxwell and newton largely in the pristine privacy of his own thoughts.

in  this  chapter  we  discuss  how  einstein  resolved  the  conflict  through  his  special  theory  of
relativity, and in so doing forever changed our conceptions of space and time. it is perhaps surprising
that the essential concern of special relativity is to understand precisely how the world appears to

individuals,  often  called  "observers,"  who  are  moving  relative  to  one  another. at  first,  this  might
seem  to  be  an  intellectual  exercise  of  minimal  importance.  quite  the  contrary:  in  the  hands  of
einstein, with his imaginings of observers chasing after light beams, there are profound implications
to grasping fully how even the most mundane situations appear to individuals in relative motion.

intuition and its flaws

common experience highlights certain ways in which observations by such individuals differ. trees
alongside a highway, for example, appear to be moving from the viewpoint of a driver but appear
stationary to a hitchhiker sitting on a guardrail. similarly, the dashboard of the automobile does not
appear to be moving from the viewpoint of the driver (one hopes!), but like the rest of the car, it does
appear  to  be  moving  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  hitchhiker.  these  are  such  basic  and  intuitive
properties of how the world works that we hardly take note of them.

special  relativity,  however,  proclaims  that  the  differences  in  observations  between  two  such
individuals are more subtle and profound. it makes the strange claim that observers in relative motion
will have different perceptions of distance and of time. this means, as we shall see, that identical
wristwatches worn by two individuals in relative motion will tick at different rates and hence will
not agree on the amount of time that elapses between chosen events. special relativity demonstrates
that  this  statement  does  not  slander  the  accuracy  of  the  wristwatches  involved;  rather,  it  is  a  true
statement about time itself.

similarly, observers in relative motion carrying identical tape measures will not agree on the
lengths of distances measured. again, this is not due to inaccuracies in the measuring devices or to
errors in how they are used. the most accurate measuring devices in the world confirm that space and
time—as measured by distances and durations—are not experienced identically by everyone. in the
precise  way  delineated  by  einstein,  special  relativity  resolves  the  conflict  between  our  intuition
about motion and the properties of light, but there is a price: individuals who are moving with respect
to each other will not agree on their observations of either space or time.

it has been almost a century since einstein informed the world of his dramatic discovery, yet
most of us still see space and time in absolute terms. special relativity is not in our bones—we do not
feel it. its implications are not a central part of our intuition. the reason for this is quite simple: the
effects of special relativity depend upon how fast one moves, and at the speeds of cars, planes, or
even  space  shuttles,  these  effects  are  minuscule.  differences  in  perceptions  of  space  and  of  time
between individuals planted on the earth and those traveling in cars or planes do occur, but they are
so  small  that  they  go  unnoticed.  however,  were  one  to  take  a  trip  in  a  futuristic  space  vehicle
traveling  at  a  substantial  fraction  of  light  speed,  the  effects  of  relativity  would  become  plainly
obvious. this, of course, is still in the realm of science fiction. nevertheless, as we shall discuss in
later sections, clever experiments allow clear and precise observation of the relative properties of
space and time predicted by einstein's theory.

to get a sense of the scales involved, imagine that the year is 1970 and big, fast cars are in.
slim, having just spent all his savings on a new trans am, goes with his brother jim to the local drag
strip to give the car the kind of test-drive forbidden by the dealer. after revving up the car, slim
streaks down the mile-long strip at 120 miles per hour while jim stands on the sideline and times him.
wanting an independent confirmation, slim also uses a stopwatch to determine how long it takes his
new car to traverse the track. prior to einstein's work, no one would have questioned that if both slim

and  jim  have  properly  functioning  stopwatches,  each  will  measure  the  identical  elapsed  time.  but
according  to  special  relativity,  while  jim  will  measure  an  elapsed  time  of  30  seconds,  slim's
stopwatch will record an elapsed time of 29.99999999999952 seconds—a tiny bit less. of course,
this difference is so small that it could be detected only through a measurement whose accuracy is
well  beyond  the  capacity  of  hand-held  stopwatches  run  by  the  press  of  a  finger,  olympic-quality
timing  systems,  or  even  the  most  precisely  engineered  atomic  clocks.  it  is  no  wonder  that  our
everyday experiences do not reveal the fact that the passage of time depends upon our state of motion.
there will be a similar disagreement on measurements of length. for example, on another test
run jim uses a clever trick to measure the length of slim's new car: he starts his stopwatch just as the
front of the car reaches him and he stops it just as the back of the car passes. since jim knows that
slim  is  speeding  along  at  120  miles  per  hour,  he  is  able  to  figure  out  the  length  of  the  car  by
multiplying this speed by the elapsed time on his stopwatch. again, prior to einstein, no one would
have questioned that the length jim measures in this indirect way would agree exactly with the length
slim  carefully  measured  when  the  car  sat  motionless  on  the  showroom  floor.  special  relativity
proclaims, on the contrary, that if slim and jim carry out precise measurements in this manner and
slim finds the car to be, say, exactly 16 feet long, then  jim's  measurement  will  find  the  car  to  be
15.99999999999974  feet  long—a  tiny  bit  less.  as  with  the  measurement  of  time,  this  is  such  a
minuscule difference that ordinary instruments are just not accurate enough to detect it.

although  the  differences  are  extremely  small,  they  show  a  fatal  flaw  in  the  commonly  held
conception of universal and immutable space and time. as the relative velocity of individuals such as
slim and jim gets larger, this flaw becomes increasingly apparent. to achieve noticeable differences,
the speeds involved must be a sizeable fraction of the maximum possible speed—that of light—which
maxwell's  theory  and  experimental  measurements  show  to  be  about  186,000  miles  per  second,  or
about 670 million miles per hour. this is fast enough to circle the earth more than seven times in a
second. if slim, for example, were to travel not at 120 miles per hour but at 580 million miles per
hour (about 87 percent of light speed), the mathematics of special relativity predicts that jim would
measure  the  length  of  the  car  to  be  about  eight  feet,  which  is  substantially  different  from  slim's
measurement (as well as the specifications in the owner's manual). similarly, the time to traverse the
drag strip according to jim will be about twice as long as the time measured by slim.

since  such  enormous  speeds  are  far  beyond  anything  currently  attainable,  the  effects  of  "time
dilation" and "lorentz contraction," as these phenomena are technically called, are extremely small in
day-to-day life. if we happened to live in a world in which things typically traveled at speeds close
to that of light, these properties of space and time would be so completely intuitive—since we would
experience them constantly—that they would deserve no more discussion than the apparent motion of
trees on the side of the road mentioned at the outset of this chapter. but since we don't live in such a
world, these features are unfamiliar. as we shall see, understanding and accepting them requires that
we subject our worldview to a thorough makeover.

the principle of relativity

there are two simple yet deeply rooted structures that form the foundation of special relativity. as
mentioned, one concerns properties of light; we shall discuss this more fully in the next section. the
other is more abstract. it is concerned not with any specific physical law but rather with all physical
laws, and is known as the principle of relativity. the principle of relativity rests on a simple fact:

the two stories describe one and the same situation from two distinct but equally valid points of
view.  each  observer  feels  stationary  and  perceives  the  other  as  moving.  each  perspective  is
understandable and justifiable. as there is symmetry between the two space-dwellers, there is, on
quite fundamental grounds, no way of saying one perspective is "right" and the other "wrong." each
perspective has an equal claim on truth.

this  example  captures  the  meaning  of  the  principle  of  relativity:  the  concept  of  motion  is
relative.  we  can  speak  about  the  motion  of  an  object,  but  only  relative  to  or  by  comparison  with
another. there is thus no meaning to the statement "george is traveling at 10 miles per hour," as we
have  not  specified  any  other  object  for  comparison.  there is  meaning  to  the  statement  "george  is
traveling at 10 miles per hour past gracie," as we have now specified gracie as the benchmark. as
our example shows, this last statement is completely equivalent to "gracie is traveling at 10 miles per
hour past george (in the opposite direction)." in other words, there is no "absolute" notion of motion.
motion is relative.

whenever  we  discuss  speed  or  velocity  (an  object's  speed  and  its  direction  of  motion),  we  must
specify precisely who or what is doing the measuring. understanding the meaning and importance of
this statement is easily accomplished by contemplating the following situation.

imagine that george, who is wearing a spacesuit with a small, red flashing light, is floating in
the absolute darkness of completely empty space, far away from any planets, stars, or galaxies. from
george's  perspective,  he  is  completely  stationary,  engulfed  in  the  uniform,  still  blackness  of  the
cosmos. off in the distance, george catches sight of a tiny, green flashing light that appears to be
coming closer and closer. finally, it gets close enough for george to see that the light is attached to
the spacesuit of another space-dweller, gracie, who is slowly floating by. she waves as she passes,
as does george, and she recedes into the distance. this story can be told with equal validity from
gracie's perspective. it begins in the same manner with gracie completely alone in the immense still
darkness of outer space. off in the distance, gracie sees a red flashing light, which appears to be
coming  closer  and  closer.  finally,  it  gets  close  enough  for  gracie  to  see  that  it  is  attached  to  the
spacesuit  of  another  being,  george,  who  is  slowly  floating  by.  he  waves  as  he  passes,  as  does
gracie, and he recedes into the distance.

a key element of this story is that neither george nor gracie is being pushed, pulled, or in any
other  way  acted  upon  by  a  force  or  influence  that  could  disturb  their  serene  state  of  force-free,
constant-velocity motion. thus, a more precise statement is that force-free motion has meaning only
by comparison with other objects. this is an important clarification, because if forces are involved,
they cause changes in the velocity of the observers—changes to their speed and/or their direction of
motion—and these changes can be felt. for instance, if george were wearing a jet-pack firing away
from his back, he would definitely feel that he was moving. this feeling is intrinsic. if the jet-pack is
firing  away,  george knows  he  is  moving,  even  if  his  eyes  are  closed  and  therefore  can  make  no
comparisons with other objects. even without such comparisons, he would no longer claim that he
was stationary while "the rest of the world was moving by him." constant-velocity motion is relative;
not so for non-constant-velocity motion, or, equivalently, accelerated motion. (we will re-examine
this statement in the next chapter when we take up accelerated motion and discuss einstein's general
theory of relativity.)

setting  these  stories  in  the  darkness  of  empty  space  aids  understanding  by  removing  such
familiar things as streets and buildings, which we typically, although unjustifiably, accord the special
status  of  "stationary."  nonetheless,  the  same  principle  applies  to  terrestrial  settings,  and  in  fact  is
commonly experienced.1 for example, imagine that after you have fallen asleep on a train, you awake

just as your train is passing another on adjacent parallel tracks. with your view through the window
completely blocked by the other train, thereby preventing you from seeing any other objects, you may
temporarily be uncertain as to whether your train is moving, the other train is moving, or both. of
course, if your train shakes or jostles, or if the train changes direction by rounding a bend, you can
feel that you are moving. but if the ride is perfectly smooth—if the train's velocity remains constant—
you will observe relative motion between the trains without being able to tell for certain which is
moving.

let's take this one step further. imagine you are on such a train and that you pull down the shades
so  that  the  windows  are  fully  covered.  without  the  ability  to  see  anything  outside  your  own
compartment, and assuming that the train moves at absolutely constant velocity, there will be no way
for you to determine your state of motion. the compartment around you will look precisely the same
regardless  of  whether  the  train  is  sitting  still  on  the  tracks  or  moving  at  high  speed.  einstein
formalized  this  idea,  one  that  actually  goes  back  to  insights  of  galileo,  by  proclaiming  that  it  is
impossible for you or any fellow traveler to perform an experiment within the closed compartment
that will determine whether or not the train is moving. this again captures the principle of relativity:
since  all  force-free  motion  is  relative,  it  has  meaning  only  by  comparison  with  other  objects  or
individuals also undergoing force-free motion. there is no way for you to determine anything about
your state of motion without making some direct or indirect comparison with "outside" objects. there
simply  is  no  notion  of  "absolute"  constant-velocity  motion;  only  comparisons  have  any  physical
meaning.

in fact, einstein realized that the principle of relativity makes an even grander claim: the laws of
physics—whatever they may be—must be absolutely identical for all observers undergoing constant-
velocity  motion.  if  george  and  gracie  are  not  just  floating  solo  in  space,  but,  rather,  are  each
conducting the same set of experiments in their respective floating space-stations, the results they find
will be identical. once again, each is perfectly justified in believing that his or her station is at rest,
even  though  the  two  stations  are  in  relative  motion.  if  all  of  their  equipment  is  identical,  there  is
nothing  distinguishing  the  two  experimental  setups—they  are  completely  symmetric.  the  laws  of
physics  that  each  deduces  from  the  experiments  will  likewise  be  identical.  neither  they  nor  their
experiments  can  feel—that  is,  depend  upon  in  any  way—constant-velocity  travel.  it  is  this  simple
concept  that  establishes  complete  symmetry  between  such  observers;  it  is  this  concept  that  is
embodied in the principle of relativity. we shall shortly make use of this principle to profound effect.

the speed of light

the  second  key  ingredient  in  special  relativity  has  to  do  with  light  and  properties  of  its  motion.
contrary to our claim that there is no meaning to the statement "george is traveling at 10 miles per
hour"  without  a  specified  benchmark  for  comparison,  almost  a  century  of  effort  by  a  series  of
dedicated experimental physicists has shown that any and all observers will agree that light travels at
670 million miles per hour regardless of benchmarks for comparison.

this fact has required a revolution in our view of the universe. let's first gain an understanding
of its meaning by contrasting it with similar statements applied to more common objects. imagine it's
a nice, sunny day and you go outside to play a game of catch with a friend. for a while, you both
leisurely throw the ball back and forth with a speed of, say, 20 feet per second, when suddenly an
unexpected electrical storm stirs overhead, sending you both running for cover. after it passes, you

rejoin to resume your game of catch but you notice that something has changed. your friend's hair has
become wild and spiky, and her eyes have grown severe and crazed. when you look at her hand, you
are stunned to see that she is no longer planning to play catch with a baseball, but instead is about to
toss you a hand grenade. understandably, your enthusiasm for playing catch diminishes substantially;
you turn to run. when your companion throws the grenade, it will still fly toward you, but because you
are running, the speed with which it approaches you will be less than 20 feet per second. in fact,
common experience tells us that if you can run at, say, 12 feet per second then the hand-grenade will
approach you at (20-12 =) 8 feet per second. as another example, if you are in the mountains and an
avalanche of snow is rumbling toward you, your inclination is to turn and run because this will cause
the  speed  with  which  the  snow  approaches  you  to  decrease—and  this,  generally,  is  a  good  thing.
again, a stationary individual perceives the speed of the approaching snow to be greater than that
perceived by someone in retreat.

now, let's compare these basic observations about baseballs, grenades, and avalanches to those
about light. to make the comparisons tighter, think about a light beam as composed of tiny "packets"
or "bundles" known as photons (a feature of light we will discuss more fully in chapter 4). when we
turn  on  a  flashlight  or  a  laser  beam  we  are,  in  effect,  shooting  a  stream  of  photons  in  whatever
direction we point the device. as we did for grenades and avalanches, let's consider how the motion
of a photon appears to someone who is moving. imagine that your crazed friend has swapped her
grenade  for  a  powerful  laser.  if  she  fires  the  laser  toward  you—and  if  you  had  the  appropriate
measuring equipment—you would find that the speed of approach of the photons in the beam is 670
million miles per hour. but what if you run away, as you did when faced with the prospect of playing
catch with a hand grenade? what speed will you now measure for the approaching photons? to make
things more compelling, imagine that you can hitch a ride on the starship enterprise and zip away
from your friend at, say, 100 million miles per hour. following the reasoning based on the traditional
newtonian  worldview,  since  you  are  now  speeding  away,  you  would  expect  to  measure  a slower
speed for the oncoming photons. specifically, you would expect to find them approaching you at (670
million miles per hour -100 million miles per hour =) 570 million miles per hour.

mounting evidence from a variety of experiments dating back as far as the 1880s, as well as
careful analysis and interpretation of maxwell's electromagnetic theory of light, slowly convinced the
scientific community that, in fact, this is not what you will see. even though you are retreating, you
will still measure the speed of the approaching photons as 670 million miles per hour, not a bit
less.  although  at  first  it  sounds  completely  ridiculous,  unlike  what  happens  if  one  runs  from  an
oncoming baseball, grenade, or avalanche, the speed of approaching photons is always 670 million
miles per hour. the same is true if you run toward oncoming photons or chase after them—their speed
of approach or recession is completely unchanged; they still appear to travel at 670 million miles per
hour. regardless of relative motion between the source of photons and the observer, the speed of light
is always the same.2

technological  limitations  are  such  that  the  "experiments"  with  light,  as  described,  cannot
actually  be  carried  out.  however,  comparable  experiments  can.  for  instance,  in  1913  the  dutch
physicist willem de sitter suggested that fast-moving binary stars (two stars that orbit one another)
could be used to measure the effect of a moving source on the speed of light. various experiments of
this sort over the past eight decades have verified that the speed of light received from a moving star
is  the same  as  that  from  a  stationary  star—670  million  miles  per  hour—to  within  the  impressive
accuracy of ever more refined measuring devices. moreover, a wealth of other detailed experiments
has been carried out during the past century—experiments that directly measure the speed of light in

various  circumstances,  as  well  as  test  many  of  the  implications  arising  from  this  characteristic  of
light, as discussed shortly—and all have confirmed the constancy of the speed of light.

if you find this property of light hard to swallow, you are not alone. at the turn of the century
physicists  went  to  great  length  to  refute  it.  they  couldn't.  einstein,  to  the  contrary,  embraced  the
constancy of the speed of light, for here was the answer to the conflict that had troubled him since he
was a teenager: no matter how hard you chase after a light beam, it still retreats from you at light
speed. you can't make the apparent speed with which light departs one iota less than 670 million
miles  per  hour,  let  alone  slow  it  down  to  the  point  of  appearing  stationary.  case  closed.  but  this
triumph  over  paradox  was  no  small  victory.  einstein  realized  that  the  constancy  of  light's  speed
spelled the downfall of newtonian physics.

truth and consequences

speed is a measure of how far an object can travel in a given duration of time. if we are in a car
going 65 miles per hour, this means of course that we will travel 65 miles if we persist in this state of
motion for an hour. phrased in this manner, speed is a rather mundane concept, and you may wonder
about the fuss we have made regarding the speed of baseballs, snowballs, and photons. however,
let's note that distance is a notion about space—in particular it is a measure of how much space there
is  between  two  points.  also  note  that duration  is  a  notion  about  time—how  much  time  elapses
between two events. speed, therefore, is intimately connected with our notions of space and time.
when we phrase it this way, we see that any experimental fact that defies our common conception
about  speed,  such  as  the  constancy  of  the  speed  of  light,  has  the  potential  to  defy  our  common
conceptions of space and time themselves. it is for this reason that the strange fact about the speed of
light  deserves  detailed  scrutiny—scrutiny  given  to  it  by  einstein,  leading  him  to  remarkable
conclusions.

the effect on time: part i

with minimal effort, we can make use of the constancy of the speed of light to show that the familiar
everyday conception of time is plain wrong. imagine that the leaders of two warring nations, sitting at
opposite  ends  of  a  long  negotiating  table,  have  just  concluded  an  agreement  for  a  cease-fire,  but
neither wants to sign the accord before the other. the secretary-general of the united nations comes
up with a brilliant resolution. a light bulb, initially turned off, will be placed midway between the
two  presidents.  when  it  is  turned  on,  the  light  it  emits  will  reach  each  of  the  presidents
simultaneously, since they are equidistant from the bulb. each president agrees to sign a copy of the
accord  when  he  or  she  sees  the  light.  the  plan  is  carried  out  and  the  agreement  is  signed  to  the
satisfaction of both sides.

flushed  with  success,  the  secretary-general  makes  use  of  the  same  approach  with  two  other
embattled nations that have also reached a peace agreement. the only difference is that the presidents
involved in this negotiation are sitting at opposite ends of a table inside a train traveling along at
constant  velocity.  fittingly,  the  president  of  forwardland  is  facing  in  the  direction  of  the  train's
motion while the president of backwardland is facing in the opposite direction. familiar with the fact
that the laws of physics take precisely the same form regardless of one's state of motion so long as

this motion is unchanging, the secretary-general takes no heed of this difference, and carries out the
light bulb–initiated signing ceremony as before. both presidents sign the agreement, and along with
their entourage of advisers, celebrate the end of hostilities.

just then, word arrives that fighting has broken out between people from each country who had
been  watching  the  signing  ceremony  from  the  platform  outside  the  moving  train. all  those  on  the
negotiation  train  are  dismayed  to  hear  that  the  reason  for  the  renewed  hostilities  is  the  claim  by
people from forwardland that they have been duped, as their president signed the agreement before
the president of backwardland. as everyone on the train—from both sides—agrees that the accord
was  signed  simultaneously,  how  can  it  be  that  the  outside  observers  watching  the  ceremony  think
otherwise?

let's consider in more detail the perspective of an observer on the platform. initially the bulb on
the  train  is  dark,  and  then  at  a  particular  moment  it  illuminates,  sending  beams  of  light  speeding
toward  both  presidents.  from  the  perspective  of  a  person  on  the  platform,  the  president  of
forwardland is heading toward the emitted light while the president of backwardland is retreating.
this means, to the platform observers, that the light beam does not have to travel as far to reach the
president of forwardland, who moves toward the approaching light, as it does to reach the president
of backwardland, who moves away from it. this is not a statement about the speed of the light as it
travels toward the two presidents—we have already noted that regardless of the state of motion of the
source or the observer, the speed of light is always the same. instead, we are describing only how
far, from the vantage point of the platform observers, the initial flash of light must travel to reach each
of  the  presidents.  since  this  distance  is  less  for  the  president  of  forwardland  than  it  is  for  the
president of backwardland, and since the speed of light toward each is the same, the light will reach
the president of forwardland first. this is why the citizens of forwardland claim to have been duped.
when cnn broadcasts the eyewitness account, the secretary-general, the two presidents, and all
of their advisers can't believe their ears. they all agree that the light bulb was secured firmly, exactly
midway  between  the  two  presidents  and  that  therefore,  without  further  ado,  the  light  it  emitted
traveled the same distance to reach each of them. since the speed of the emitted light to the left and to
the right is the same, they believe, and in fact observed, that the light clearly reached each president
simultaneously.

who  is  right,  those  on  or  off  the  train?  the  observations  of  each  group  and  their  supporting
explanations  are  impeccable.  the  answer  is  that both  are  right.  like  our  two  space  inhabitants
george and gracie, each perspective has an equal claim on truth. the only subtlety here is that the
respective truths seem to be contradictory. an important political issue is at stake: did the presidents
sign the agreement simultaneously? the observations and reasoning above ineluctably lead us to the
conclusion that according to those on the train they did  while according to those on the platform
they did not. in other words, things that are simultaneous from the viewpoint of some observers will
not be simultaneous from the viewpoint of others, if the two groups are in relative motion.

this  is  a  startling  conclusion.  it  is  one  of  the  deepest  insights  into  the  nature  of  reality  ever
discovered. nevertheless, if long after you set down this book you remember nothing of this chapter
except for the ill-fated attempt at detente, you will have retained the essence of einstein's discovery.
without highbrow mathematics or a convoluted chain of logic, this completely unexpected feature of
time follows directly from the constancy of the speed of light, as the scenario illustrates. notice that if
the speed of light were not constant but behaved according to our intuition based on slow-moving
baseballs  and  snowballs,  the  platform  observers  would  agree  with  those  on  the  train. a  platform
observer  would  still  claim  that  the  photons  have  to  travel  farther  to  reach  the  president  of

backwardland than they do to reach the president of forwardland. however, usual intuition implies
that  the  light  approaching  the  president  of  backwardland  would  be  moving  more  quickly,  having
received a "kick" from the forward-moving train. similarly, these observers would see that the light
approaching the president of forwardland would be moving more slowly, being "dragged" back by
the  train's  motion.  when  these  (erroneous)  effects  were  considered,  the  observers  on  the  platform
would  see  that  that  the  light  beams  reached  each  president  simultaneously.  however,  in  the  real
world light does not speed up or slow down, it cannot be kicked to a higher speed or dragged to a
slower one. platform observers will therefore justifiably claim that the light reached the president of
forwardland first.

the constancy of the speed of light requires that we give up the age-old notion that simultaneity
is a universal concept that everyone, regardless of their state of motion, agrees upon. the universal
clock previously envisioned to dispassionately tick off identical seconds here on earth and on mars
and on jupiter and in the andromeda galaxy and in each and every nook and cranny of the cosmos
does not exist. on the contrary, observers in relative motion will not agree on which events occur at
the same time. once again, the reason that this conclusion—a bona fide characteristic of the world we
inhabit—is so unfamiliar is that the effects are extremely small when the speeds involved are those
commonly encountered in everyday experience. if the negotiating table were 100 feet long and the
train were moving at 10 miles per hour, platform observers would "see" that the light reached the
president of forwardland about a millionth of a billionth of a second before it reached the president
of backwardland. although this represents a genuine difference, it is so tiny that it cannot be detected
directly by human senses. if the train were moving considerably faster, say at 600 million miles per
hour, from the perspective of someone on the platform the light would take almost 20 times as long to
reach the president of backwardland compared with the time to reach the president of forwardland.
at high speeds, the startling effects of special relativity become increasingly pronounced.

the effect on time: part ii

it is difficult to give an abstract definition of time—attempts to do so often wind up invoking the word
"time"  itself,  or  else  go  through  linguistic  contortions  simply  to  avoid  doing  so.  rather  than
proceeding down such a path, we can take a pragmatic viewpoint and define time to be that which is
measured by clocks. of course, this shifts the burden of definition to the word "clock"; here we can
somewhat loosely think of a clock as a device that undergoes perfectly regular cycles of motion. we
will measure time by counting the number of cycles our clock goes through. a familiar clock such as a
wristwatch meets this definition; it has hands that move in regular cycles of motion and we do indeed
measure elapsed time by counting the number of cycles (or fractions thereof) that the hands swing
through between chosen events.

of course, the meaning of "perfectly regular cycles of motion" implicitly involves a notion of
time,  since  "regular"  refers  to  equal  time  durations  elapsing  for  each  cycle.  from  a  practical
standpoint we address this by building clocks out of simple physical components that, on fundamental
grounds, we expect to undergo repetitive cyclical evolutions that do not change in any manner from
one cycle to the next. grandfather clocks with pendulums that swing back and forth and atomic clocks
based on repetitive atomic processes provide simple examples.

our goal is to understand how motion affects the passage of time, and since we have defined
time  operationally  in  terms  of  clocks,  we  can  translate  our  question  into  how  motion  affects  the

"ticking" of clocks. it is crucial to emphasize at the outset that our discussion is not concerned with
how the mechanical elements of a particular clock happen to respond to shaking or jostling that might
result from bumpy motion. in fact, we will consider only the simplest and most serene kind of motion
—motion at absolutely constant velocity—and therefore there will not be any shaking or jostling at
all. rather, we are interested in the universal question of how motion affects the passage of time and
therefore how it fundamentally affects the ticking of any and all clocks regardless of their particular
design or construction.

for this purpose we introduce the world's conceptually simplest (yet most impractical) clock. it
is  known  as  a  "light  clock"  and  consists  of  two  small  mirrors  mounted  on  a  bracket  facing  one
another, with a single photon of light bouncing back and forth between them (see figure 2.1). if the
mirrors are about six inches apart, it will take the photon about a billionth of a second to complete
one  round-trip  journey.  "ticks"  on  the  light  clock  may  be  thought  of  as  occurring  every  time  the
photon completes a round-trip—a billion ticks means that one second has elapsed.

we can use the light clock like a stopwatch to measure the time elapsed between events: we
simply  count  how  many  ticks  occur  during  the  period  of  interest  and  multiply  by  the  time
corresponding to one tick. for instance, if we are timing a horse race and count that between the start
and finish the number of round-trip photon journeys is 55 billion, we can conclude that the race took
55 seconds.

the reason we use the light clock in our discussion is that its mechanical simplicity pares away
extraneous  details  and  therefore  provides  us  with  the  clearest  insight  into  how  motion  affects  the
passage of time. to see this, imagine that we are idly watching the passage of time by looking at a
ticking light clock placed on a nearby table. then, all of sudden, a second light clock slides by on the
table, moving at constant velocity (see figure 2.2) the question we ask is whether the moving light
clock will tick at the same rate as the stationary light clock?

figure 2.1 a light clock consists of two parallel mirrors with a photon that bounces between them.
the clock "ticks" each time the photon completes a round-trip journey.

figure 2.2 a stationary light clock in the foreground while a second light clock slides by at constant
speed.

to  answer  the  question,  let's  consider  the  path,  from  our  perspective,  that  the  photon  in  the
sliding clock must take in order for it to result in a tick. the photon starts at the base of the sliding
clock, as in figure 2.2, and first travels to the upper mirror. since, from our perspective, the clock is

moving, the photon must travel at an angle, as shown in figure 2.3. if the photon did not travel along
this path, it would miss the upper mirror and fly off into space. as the sliding clock has every right to
claim that it's stationary and everything else is moving, we know that the photon will hit the upper
mirror and hence the path we have drawn is correct. the photon bounces off the upper mirror and
again  travels  a  diagonal  path  to  hit  the  lower  mirror,  and  the  sliding  clock  ticks.  the  simple  but
essential  point  is  that  the  double  diagonal  path  that  we  see  the  photon  traverse  is longer  than  the
straight up-and-down path taken by the photon in the stationary clock; in addition to traversing the up-
and-down distance, the photon in the sliding clock must also travel to the right, from our perspective.
moreover, the constancy of the speed of light tells us that the sliding clock's photon travels at exactly
the same speed as the stationary clock's photon. but since it must travel farther to achieve one tick it
will  tick less  frequently.  this  simple  argument  establishes  that  the  moving  light  clock,  from  our
perspective,  ticks  more  slowly  than  the  stationary  light  clock. and  since  we  have  agreed  that  the
number  of  ticks  directly  reflects  how  much  time  has  passed,  we  see  that  the  passage  of  time  has
slowed down for the moving clock.

figure 2.3 from our perspective, the photon in the sliding clock travels on a diagonal path.

you might wonder whether this merely reflects some special feature of light clocks and would
not apply to grandfather clocks or rolex watches. would time as measured by these more familiar
clocks also slow down? the answer is a resounding yes, as can be seen by an application of the
principle of relativity. let's attach a rolex watch to the top of each of our light clocks, and rerun the
preceding experiment. as discussed, a stationary light clock and its attached rolex measure identical
time durations, with a billion ticks on the light clock occurring for every one second of elapsed time
on the rolex. but what about the moving light clock and its attached rolex? does the rate of ticking
on  the  moving  rolex  slow  down  so  that  it  stays  synchronized  with  the  light  clock  to  which  it  is
attached?  well,  to  make  the  point  most  forcefully,  imagine  that  the  light  clock–rolex  watch
combination is moving because it is bolted to the floor of a windowless train compartment gliding
along perfectly straight and smooth tracks at constant speed. by the principle of relativity, there is no
way for an observer on this train to detect any influence of the train's motion. but if the light clock and
rolex were to fall out of synchronization, this would be a noticeable influence indeed. and so the
moving  light  clock  and  its  attached  rolex must  still  measure  equal  time  durations;  the  rolex must
slow  down  in  exactly  the  same  way  that  the  light  clock  does.  regardless  of  brand,  type,  or
construction, clocks that are moving relative to one another record the passage of time at different
rates.

the light clock discussion also makes clear that the precise time difference between stationary
and moving clocks depends on how much farther the sliding clock's photon must travel to complete
each round-trip journey. this in turn depends on how quickly the sliding clock is moving—from the
viewpoint of a stationary observer, the faster the clock is sliding, the farther the photon must travel to
the right. we conclude that in comparison to a stationary clock, the rate of ticking of the sliding clock
becomes slower and slower as it moves faster and faster.3

to get a sense of scale, note that the photon traverses one round-trip in about a billionth of a
second. for the clock to be able to travel an appreciable distance during the time for one tick it must
therefore be traveling enormously quickly—that is, some significant fraction of the speed of light. if it
is traveling at more commonplace speeds like 10 miles per hour, the distance it can move to the right
before one tick is completed is minuscule—just about 15 billionths of a foot. the extra distance that
the sliding photon must travel is tiny and it has a correspondingly tiny effect on the rate of ticking of
the moving clock. and again, by the principle of relativity, this is true for all clocks—that is, for time
itself. this is why beings such as ourselves who travel relative to one another at such slow speeds
are generally unaware of the distortions in the passage of time. the effects, although present to be
sure, are incredibly small. if, on the other hand, we were able to grab hold of the sliding clock and
move with it at, say, three-quarters the speed of light, the equations of special relativity can be used
to show that stationary observers would see our moving clock ticking at just about two-thirds the rate
of their own. a significant effect, indeed.

life on the run

we have seen that the constancy of the speed of light implies that a moving light clock ticks more
slowly than a stationary light clock. and by the principle of relativity, this must be true not only for
light clocks but also for any clock—it must be true of time itself. time elapses more slowly for an
individual in motion than it does for a stationary individual. if the fairly simple reasoning that has led
us to this conclusion is correct, then, for instance, shouldn't one be able to live longer by being in
motion  rather  than  staying  stationary? after  all,  if  time  elapses  more  slowly  for  an  individual  in
motion than for an individual at rest, then this disparity should apply not just to time as measured by
watches but also to time as measured by heartbeats and the decay of body parts. this is the case, as
has been directly confirmed—not with the life expectancy of humans, but with certain particles from
the microworld: muons. there is one important catch, however, that prevents us from proclaiming a
newfound fountain of youth.

when sitting at rest in the laboratory, muons disintegrate by a process closely akin to radioactive
decay, in an average of about two millionths of a second. this disintegration is an experimental fact
supported by an enormous amount of evidence. it's as if a muon lives its life with a gun to its head;
when  it  reaches  two  millionths  of  a  second  in  age,  it  pulls  the  trigger  and  explodes  apart  into
electrons and neutrinos. but if these muons are not sitting at rest in the laboratory and instead are
traveling through a piece of equipment known as a particle accelerator that boosts them to just shy of
light-speed,  their  average  life  expectancy  as  measured  by  scientists  in  the  laboratory  increases
dramatically. this really happens. at 667 million miles per hour (about 99.5 percent of light speed),
the muon lifetime is seen to increase by a factor of about ten. the explanation, according to special
relativity, is that "wristwatches" worn by the muons tick much more slowly than the clocks in the
laboratory, so long after the laboratory clocks say that the muons should have pulled their triggers and
exploded, the watches on the fast-moving muons have yet to reach doom time. this is a very direct
and  dramatic  demonstration  of  the  effect  of  motion  on  the  passage  of  time.  if  people  were  to  zip
around  as  quickly  as  these  muons,  their  life  expectancy  would  also  increase  by  the  same  factor.
rather than living seventy years, people would live 700 years.4

now for the catch. although laboratory observers see fast-moving muons living far longer than
their  stationary  brethren,  this  is  due  to time  elapsing  more  slowly  for  the  muons  in  motion.  this

slowing of time applies not just to the watches worn by the muons but also to all activities they might
undertake. for instance, if a stationary muon can read 100 books in its short lifetime, its fast-moving
cousin will also be able to read the same 100 books, because although it appears to live longer than
the stationary muon, its rate of reading—as well as everything else in its life—has slowed down as
well. from the laboratory perspective, it's as if the moving muon is living its life in slow motion;
from this viewpoint the moving muon will live longer than a stationary one, but the "amount of life"
the muon will experience is precisely the same. the same conclusion, of course, holds true for the
fast-moving  people  with  a  life  expectancy  of  centuries.  from their  perspective,  it's  life  as  usual.
from our perspective they are living life in hyper-slow motion and therefore one of their normal life
cycles takes an enormous amount of our time.

who is moving, anyway?

the relativity of motion is both the key to understanding einstein's theory and a potential source of
confusion. you may have noticed that a reversal of perspective interchanges the roles of the "moving"
muons, whose watches we have argued run slowly, and their "stationary" counterparts. just as both
george  and  gracie  had  an  equal  right  to  declare  that  they  were  stationary  and  that  the  other  was
moving, the muons we have described as being in motion are fully justified in proclaiming that, from
their  perspective,  they  are  motionless  and  that  it  is  the  "stationary"  muons  that  are  moving,  in  the
opposite  direction.  the  arguments  presented  can  be  applied  equally  well  from  this  perspective,
leading  to  the  seemingly  opposite  conclusion  that  watches  worn  by  the  muons  we  christened  as
stationary are running slow compared with those worn by the muons we described as moving.

we have already met a situation, the signing ceremony with the light bulb, in which different
viewpoints lead to results that seem to be completely at odds. in that case we were forced by the
basic reasoning of special relativity to give up the ingrained idea that everyone, regardless of state of
motion, agrees about which events happen at the same time. the present incongruity, though, appears
to  be  worse.  how  can  two  observers  each  claim  that  the  other's  watch  is  running  slower?  more
dramatically, the different but equally valid muon perspectives seem to lead us to the conclusion that
each group will claim, firmly but sadly, that they will die first. we are learning that the world can
have some unexpectedly strange features, but we would hope that it does not cross into the realm of
logical absurdity. so what's going on?

as with all apparent paradoxes arising from special relativity, under close examination these
logical  dilemmas  resolve  to  reveal  new  insights  into  the  workings  of  the  universe.  to  avoid  ever
more severe anthropomorphizing, let's switch from muons back to george and gracie, who now, in
addition  to  their  flashing  lights,  have  bright  digital  clocks  on  their  spacesuits.  from  george's
perspective,  he  is  stationary  while  gracie  with  her  flashing  green  light  and  large  digital  clock
appears in the distance and then passes him in the blackness of empty space. he notices that gracie's
clock is running slow in comparison to his (with the rate of slowdown depending on how fast they
pass one another). were he a bit more astute, he would also note that in addition to the passage of
time on her clock, everything about gracie—the way she waves as she passes, the speed with which
she blinks her eyes, and so on—is occurring in slow motion. from gracie's perspective, exactly the
same observations apply to george.

although this seems paradoxical, let's try to pinpoint a precise experiment that would reveal a
logical absurdity. the simplest possibility is to arrange things so that when george and gracie pass

if  george  chases  after  gracie  in  this  manner,  the  time  difference  that  their  clocks  will  show
depends  on  their  relative  velocity  and  the  details  of  how  george  uses  his  jet-pack. as  is  by  now
familiar,  if  the  speeds  involved  are  small,  the  difference  will  be  minuscule.  but  if  substantial
fractions of light speed are involved, the differences can be minutes, days, years, centuries, or more.
as one concrete example, imagine that the relative speed of george and gracie when they pass and
are moving apart is 99.5 percent of light speed. further, let's say that george waits 3 years, according
to his clock, before firing up his jet-pack for a momentary blast that sends him closing in on gracie at
the same speed that they were previously moving apart, 99.5 percent of light speed. when he reaches
gracie, 6 years will have elapsed on his clock since it will take him 3 years to catch her. however,
the mathematics of special relativity shows that 60 years will have elapsed on her clock. this is no
sleight  of  hand:  gracie  will  have  to  search  her  distant  memory,  some  60  years  before,  to  recall
passing george in space. for george, on the other hand, it was a mere 6 years ago. in a real sense,
george's motion has made him a time traveler, albeit in a very precise sense: he has traveled into
gracie's future.

getting the two clocks back together for direct comparison might seem to be merely a logistical
nuisance, but it is really at the heart of the matter. we can imagine a variety of tricks to circumvent
this chink in the paradox armor, but all ultimately fail. for instance, rather than bringing the clocks
back together, what if george and gracie compare their clocks by cellular telephone communication?
if such communication were instantaneous, we would be faced with an insurmountable inconsistency:
reasoning from gracie's perspective, george's clock is running slow and hence he must communicate
less elapsed time; reasoning from george's perspective, gracie's clock is running slow and hence she
must communicate less elapsed time. they both can't be right, and we would be sunk. the key point of
course  is  that  cell  phones,  like  all  forms  of  communication,  do  not  transmit  their  signals
instantaneously. cell phones operate with radio waves, a form of light, and the signal they transmit
therefore  travels  at  light  speed.  this  means  that  it  takes  time  for  the  signals  to  be  received—just
enough time delay, in fact, to make each perspective compatible with the other.

one another they both set their clocks to read 12:00. as they travel apart, each claims that the other's
clock is running slower. to confront this disagreement head on, george and gracie must rejoin each
other and directly compare the time elapsed on their clocks. but how can they do this? well, george
has a jet-pack that he can use, from his perspective, to catch up with gracie. but if he does this, the
symmetry  of  their  two  perspectives,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  apparent  paradox,  is  broken  since
george  will  have  undergone accelerated,  non-force-free  motion.  when  they  rejoin  in  this  manner,
less time will indeed have elapsed on george's clock as he can now definitively say that he was in
motion, since he could feel it. no longer are george's and gracie's perspectives on equal footing. by
turning on the jet-pack, george relinquishes his claim to being at rest.

let's  see  this,  first,  from  george's  perspective.  imagine  that  every  hour,  on  the  hour,  george
recites into his cell phone, "it's twelve o'clock and all is well," "it's one o'clock and all is well," and
so forth. since from his perspective gracie's clock runs slow, at first blush he thinks that gracie will
receive these messages prior to her clock's reaching the appointed hour. in this way, he concludes,
gracie  will  have  to  agree  that  hers  is  the  slow  clock.  but  then  he  rethinks  it:  "since  gracie  is
receding from me, the signal i send to her by cell phone must travel ever longer distances to reach
her.  maybe  this  additional  travel  time  compensates  for  the  slowness  of  her  clock."  george's
realization that there are competing effects—the slowness of gracie's clock vs. the travel time of his
signal—inspires  him  to  sit  down  and  quantitatively  work  out  their  combined  effect.  the  result  he
finds  is  that  the  travel  time  effect more than compensates  for  the  slowness  of  gracie's  clock.  he

comes to the surprising conclusion that gracie will receive his signals proclaiming the passing of an
hour  on  his  clock after  the  appointed  hour  has  passed  on  hers.  in  fact,  since  george  is  aware  of
gracie's expertise in physics, he knows that she will take the signal's travel time into account when
drawing  conclusions  about his  clock  based  on  his  cell  phone  communications.  a  little  more
calculation quantitatively shows that even taking the travel time into account, gracie's analysis of his
signals will lead her to the conclusion that george's clock ticks more slowly than hers.

exactly  the  same  reasoning  applies  when  we  take  gracie's  perspective,  with  her  sending  out
hourly signals to george. at first the slowness of george's clock from her perspective leads her to
think that he will receive her hourly messages prior to broadcasting his own. but when she takes into
account  the  ever  longer  distances  her  signal  must  travel  to  catch  george  as  he  recedes  into  the
darkness, she realizes that george will actually receive them after sending out his own. once again,
she realizes that even if george takes the travel time into account, he will conclude from gracie's cell
phone communications that her clock is running slower than his.

so  long  as  neither  george  nor  gracie  accelerates,  their  perspectives  are  on  precisely  equal
footing. even though it seems paradoxical, in this way they both realize that it is perfectly consistent
for each to think the other's clock is running slow.

motion's effect on space

the preceding discussion reveals that observers see moving clocks ticking more slowly than their
own—that is, time is affected by motion. it is a short step to see that motion has an equally dramatic
effect  on  space.  let's  return  to  slim  and  jim  on  the  drag  strip.  while  in  the  showroom,  as  we
mentioned, slim had carefully measured the length of his new car with a tape measure. as slim is
speeding along the drag strip, jim cannot apply this method to measure the length of the car, so he
must proceed in an indirect manner. one such approach, as we indicated earlier, is this: jim starts his
stopwatch  just  when  the  front  bumper  of  the  car  reaches  him  and  stops  it  just  as  the  rear  bumper
passes. by multiplying the elapsed time by the speed of the car, jim can determine the car's length.

using  our  newfound  appreciation  of  the  subtleties  of  time,  we  realize  that  from  slim's
perspective he is stationary while jim is moving, and hence slim sees jim's clock as running slow.
as a result, slim realizes that jim's indirect measurement of the car's length will yield a shorter result
than  he  measured  in  the  showroom,  since  in  jim's  calculation  (length  equals  speed  multiplied  by
elapsed  time)  jim  measures  the  elapsed  time  on  a  watch  that  is  running  slow.  if  it  runs  slow,  the
elapsed time he finds will be less and the result of his calculation will be a shorter length.

thus jim will perceive the length of slim's car, when it is in motion, to be less than its length
when  measured  at  rest.  this  is  an  example  of  the  general  phenomenon  that  observers  perceive  a
moving  object  as  being  shortened  along  the  direction  of  its  motion.  for  instance,  the  equations  of
special relativity show that if an object is moving at about 98 percent of light speed, then a stationary
observer  will  view  it  as  being  80  percent  shorter  than  if  it  were  at  rest.  this  phenomenon  is
illustrated in figure 2.4.5

the constancy of the speed of light has resulted in a replacement of the traditional view of space and

motion through spacetime

time as rigid and objective structures with a new conception in which they depend intimately on the
relative motion between observer and observed. we could end our discussion here, having realized
that moving objects evolve in slow motion and are foreshortened. special relativity, though, provides
a more deeply unified perspective to encompass these phenomena.

to understand this perspective, let's imagine a rather impractical automobile that rapidly attains
its cruising speed of 100 miles per hour and sticks to this speed, no more, no less, until it is shut off
and rolls to a halt. let's also imagine that, due to his growing reputation as a skilled driver, slim is
asked to test-drive the vehicle on a long, straight, and wide track in the middle of a flat stretch of
desert.  as  the  distance  between  the  start  and  finish  lines  is  10  miles,  the  car  should  cover  this
distance  in  one-tenth  of  an  hour,  or  six  minutes.  jim,  who  moonlights  as  an  automobile  engineer,
inspects the data recorded from dozens of test-drives and is disturbed to see that although most were
timed to be six minutes, the last few are a good deal longer: 6.5, 7, and even 7.5 minutes. at first he
suspects a mechanical problem, since those times seem to indicate that the car was traveling slower
than 100 miles per hour on the last three runs. yet after examining the car extensively he convinces
himself that it is in perfect condition. unable to explain the anomalously long times, he consults slim
and asks him about the final few runs. slim has a simple explanation. he tells jim that, since the track
runs from east to west, as it got later in the day, the sun was glaring into his view. during the last
three runs it was so bad that he drove from one end of the track to the other at a slight angle. he draws
a rough sketch of the path he took on the last three runs, and it is shown in figure 2.5. the explanation
for the three longer times is now perfectly clear: the path from start to finish is longer when traveling
at an angle and therefore, at the same speed of 100 miles per hour, it will take more time to cover. put
another way, when traveling at an angle, part of the 100 miles per hour is expended on going from
south to north, leaving a bit less to accomplish the trip from east to west. this implies that it will take
a little longer to traverse the strip.

figure 2.4 a moving object is shortened in the direction of its motion.

as stated, slim's explanation is easy to understand; however, it is worth rephrasing it slightly for
the  conceptual  leap  we  are  about  to  take.  the  north-south  and  east-west  directions  are  two
independent  spatial  dimensions  in  which  a  car  can  move.  (it  can  also  move  vertically,  when
traversing a mountain pass, for example, but we will not need that ability here.) slim's explanation
illustrates that even though the car was traveling at 100 miles per hour on each and every run, during
the last few runs it shared this speed between the two dimensions and hence appeared to be going
slower than 100 miles per hour in the east-west direction. during the previous runs, all 100 miles per
hour were devoted to purely east-west motion; during the last three, part of this speed was used for
north-south motion as well.

figure 2.5 due to the glaring late-afternoon sun, slim drove at an increasingly greater angle on the
last three runs.

einstein found that precisely this idea—the sharing of motion between different dimensions—
underlies all of the remarkable physics of special relativity, so long as we realize that not only can
spatial dimensions share an object's motion, but the time dimension can share this motion as well. in
fact, in the majority of circumstances, most of an object's motion is through time, not space. let's see
what this means.

motion through space is a concept we learn about early in life. although we often don't think of
things in such terms, we also learn that we, our friends, our belongings, and so forth all move through
time, as well. when we look at a clock or a wristwatch, even while we idly sit and watch tv, the
reading on the watch is constantly changing, constantly "moving forward in time." we and everything
around us are aging, inevitably passing from one moment in time to the next. in fact, the mathematician
hermann  minkowski,  and  ultimately  einstein  as  well,  advocated  thinking  about  time  as  another
dimension  of  the  universe—the  fourth  dimension—in  some  ways  quite  similar  to  the  three  spatial
dimensions in which we find ourselves immersed. although it sounds abstract, the notion of time as a
dimension is actually concrete. when we want to meet someone, we tell them where "in space" we
will expect to see them—for instance, the 9th floor of the building on the corner of 53rd street and 7th
avenue. there are three pieces of information here (9th floor, 53rd street, 7th avenue) reflecting a
particular location in the three spatial dimensions of the universe. equally important, however, is our
specification of when we expect to meet them—for instance, at 3 p.m. this piece of information tells
us  where  "in  time"  our  meeting  will  take  place.  events  are  therefore  specified  by four  pieces  of
information: three in space and one in time. such data, it is said, specifies the location of the event in
space and in time, or in spacetime, for short. in this sense, time is another dimension.

since this view proclaims that space and time are simply different examples of dimensions, can
we speak of an object's speed through time in a manner resembling the concept of its speed through
space? we can.

a  big  clue  for  how  to  do  this  comes  from  a  central  piece  of  information  we  have  already
encountered. when an object moves through space relative to us, its clock runs slow compared to
ours. that is, the speed of its motion through time slows down. here's the leap: einstein proclaimed
that  all  objects  in  the  universe  are always traveling through spacetime at one fixed speed—that of
light. this is a strange idea; we are used to the notion that objects travel at speeds considerably less
than  that  of  light.  we  have  repeatedly  emphasized  this  as  the  reason  relativistic  effects  are  so
unfamiliar  in  the  everyday  world.  all  of  this  is  true.  we  are  presently  talking  about  an  object's
combined speed through all four dimensions—three space and one time—and it is the object's speed
in this generalized sense that is equal to that of light. to understand this more fully and to reveal its
importance, we note that like the impractical single-speed car discussed above, this one fixed speed

can be shared between the different dimensions—different space and time dimensions, that is. if an
object  is  sitting  still  (relative  to  us)  and  consequently  does  not  move  through  space  at  all,  then  in
analogy to the first runs of the car, all of the object's motion is used to travel through one dimension—
in this case, the time dimension. moreover, all objects that are at rest relative to us and to each other
move  through  time—they  age—at  exactly  the  same  rate  or  speed.  if  an  object  does  move  through
space, however, this means that some of the previous motion through time must be diverted. like the
car  traveling  at  an  angle,  this  sharing  of  motion  implies  that  the  object  will  travel  more  slowly
through  time  than  its  stationary  counterparts,  since  some  of  its  motion  is  now  being  used  to  move
through space. that is, its clock will tick more slowly if it moves through space. this is exactly what
we found earlier. we now see that time slows down when an object moves relative to us because this
diverts some of its motion through time into motion through space. the speed of an object through
space is thus merely a reflection of how much of its motion through time is diverted.6

we  also  see  that  this  framework  immediately  incorporates  the  fact  that  there  is  a  limit  to  an
object's spatial velocity: the maximum speed through space occurs if all of an object's motion through
time  is  diverted  to  motion  through  space.  this  occurs  when  all  of  its  previous  light-speed  motion
through time is diverted to light-speed motion through space. but having used up all of its motion
through  time,  this  is  the fastest  speed  through  space  that  the  object—any  object—can  possibly
achieve. this is analogous to our car being test-driven directly in the north-south direction. just as the
car will have no speed left for motion in the east-west dimension, something traveling at light speed
through space will have no speed left for motion through time. thus light does not get old; a photon
that emerged from the big bang is the same age today as it was then. there is no passage of time at
light speed.

what about e=mc2?

although  einstein  did  not  advocate  calling  his  theory  "relativity"  (suggesting  instead  the  name
"invariance" theory to reflect the unchanging character of the speed of light, among other things), the
meaning  of  the  term  is  now  clear.  einstein's  work  showed  that  concepts  such  as  space  and  time,
which  had  previously  seemed  to  be  separate  and  absolute,  are  actually  interwoven  and  relative.
einstein went on to show that other physical properties of the world are unexpectedly interwoven as
well. his most famous equation provides one of the most important examples. in it, einstein asserted
that the energy (e) of an object and its mass (m) are not independent concepts; we can determine the
energy from knowledge of the mass (by multiplying the latter twice by the speed of light, c2) or we
can determine the mass from knowledge of the energy (by dividing the latter twice by the speed of
light). in other words, energy and mass—like dollars and francs—are convertible currencies. unlike
money, however, the exchange rate given by two factors of the speed of light is always and forever
fixed. since this exchange-rate factor is so large (c2 is a big number), a little mass goes an extremely
long way in producing energy. the world grasped the devastating destructive power arising from the
conversion of less than 1 percent of two pounds of uranium into energy at hiroshima; one day, through
fusion power plants, we may productively use einstein's formula to meet the energy demands of the
whole world with our endless supply of seawater.

from  the  viewpoint  of  the  concepts  we  have  emphasized  in  this  chapter,  einstein's  equation
gives  us  the  most  concrete  explanation  for  the  central  fact  that  nothing  can  travel  faster  than  light
speed. you may have wondered, for instance, why we can't take some object, a muon say, that an

accelerator has boosted up to 667 million miles per hour—99.5 percent of light speed—and "push it
a bit harder," getting it to 99.9 percent of light speed, and then "really push it harder" impelling it to
cross the light-speed barrier. einstein's formula explains why such efforts will never succeed. the
faster  something  moves  the  more  energy  it  has  and  from  einstein's  formula  we  see  that  the  more
energy something has the more massive it becomes. muons traveling at 99.9 percent of light speed,
for example, weigh a lot more than their stationary cousins. in fact, they are about 22 times as heavy
—literally. (the masses recorded in table 1.1 are for particles at rest.) but the more massive an
object is, the harder it is to increase its speed. pushing a child on a bicycle is one thing, pushing a
mack truck is quite another. so, as a muon moves more quickly it gets ever more difficult to further
increase its speed. at 99.999 percent of light speed the mass of a muon has increased by a factor of
224; at 99.99999999 percent of light speed it has increased by a factor of more than 70,000. since the
mass of the muon increases without limit as its speed approaches that of light, it would require a push
with an infinite amount of energy to reach or to cross the light barrier. this, of course, is impossible
and hence absolutely nothing can travel faster than the speed of light.

as we shall see in the next chapter, this conclusion plants the seeds for the second major conflict
faced  by  physics  during  the  past  century  and  ultimately  spells  doom  for  another  venerable  and
cherished theory—newton's universal theory of gravity.

chapter 3

of warps and ripples

through special relativity einstein resolved the conflict between the "age-old intuition" about motion
and  the  constancy  of  the  speed  of  light.  in  short,  the  solution  is  that  our  intuition  is  wrong—it  is
informed by motion that typically is extremely slow compared to the speed of light, and such low
speeds obscure the true character of space and time. special relativity reveals their nature and shows
them  to  differ  radically  from  previous  conceptions.  tinkering  with  our  understanding  of  the
foundations of space and time, though, was no small undertaking. einstein soon realized that of the
numerous  reverberations  following  from  the  revelations  of  special  relativity,  one  was  especially
profound: the dictum that nothing can outrun light proves to be incompatible with newton's revered
universal  theory  of  gravity,  proposed  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century. and  so,  while
resolving one conflict, special relativity gave rise to another. after a decade of intense, sometimes
tormented study, einstein resolved the dilemma with his general theory of relativity. in this theory,
einstein once again revolutionized our understanding of space and time by showing that they warp
and distort to communicate the force of gravity.

newton's view of gravity

isaac  newton,  born  in  1642  in  lincolnshire,  england,  changed  the  face  of  scientific  research  by
bringing  the  full  force  of  mathematics  to  the  service  of  physical  inquiry.  newton's  was  such  a
monumental intellect that, for example, when he found that the mathematics required for some of his
investigations did not exist, he invented it. nearly three centuries would pass before the world would
host a comparable scientific genius. of newton's numerous profound insights into the workings of the
universe, the one that primarily concerns us here is his universal theory of gravity.

the force of gravity pervades everyday life. it keeps us and all of the objects around us fixed to
the earth's surface; it keeps the air we breathe from escaping to outer space; it keeps the moon in orbit
around the earth and it keeps the earth bound in orbit around the sun. gravity dictates the rhythm of the
cosmic  dance  that  is  tirelessly  and  meticulously  executed  by  billions  upon  billions  of  cosmic
inhabitants,  from  asteroids  to  planets  to  stars  to  galaxies.  more  than  three  centuries  of  newton's
influence causes us to take for granted that a single force—gravity—is responsible for this wealth of
terrestrial  and  extraterrestrial  happenings.  but  before  newton  there  was  no  understanding  that  an
apple falling to earth from a tree bore witness to the same physical principle that keeps the planets
revolving  around  the  sun.  with  an  audacious  step  in  the  service  of  scientific  hegemony,  newton
united  the  physics  governing  both  heaven  and  earth  and  declared  the  force  of  gravity  to  be  the
invisible hand at work in each realm.

newton's  view  of  gravity  might  be  called  the  great  equalizer.  he  declared  that  absolutely
everything  exerts  an  attractive  gravitational  force  on  absolutely  everything  else.  regardless  of

physical composition, everything exerts as well as feels the force of gravity. based on a close study
of  johannes  kepler's  analysis  of  planetary  motion,  newton  deduced  that  the  strength  of  the
gravitational  attraction  between  two  bodies  depends  on precisely  two  things:  the  amount  of  stuff
composing each of the bodies and the distance between them. "stuff" means matter—this comprises
the total number of protons, neutrons, and electrons, which in turn determines the mass of the object.
newton's  universal  theory  of  gravity  asserts  that  the  strength  of  attraction  between  two  objects  is
larger for larger-mass objects and smaller for smaller-mass objects; it also asserts that the strength of
attraction is larger for smaller separations between the objects and smaller for larger separations.

newton  went  much  further  than  this  qualitative  description  and  wrote  down  equations  that
quantitatively describe the strength of the gravitational force between two objects. in words, these
equations state that the gravitational force between two bodies is proportional to the product of their
masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. this "law of gravity"
can be used to predict the motion of planets and comets around the sun, the moon about the earth, and
rockets  heading  off  for  planetary  explorations,  as  well  as  more  earthbound  applications  such  as
baseballs  flying  through  the  air  and  divers  spiraling  poolward  from  springboards.  the  agreement
between the predictions and the actual observed motion of such objects is spectacular. this success
gave  newton's  theory  unequivocal  support  until  the  early  part  of  the  twentieth  century.  einstein's
discovery of special relativity, however, raised what proved to be an insurmountable obstacle for
newton's theory.

the incompatibility of newtonian gravity and special relativity

a  central  feature  of  special  relativity  is  the  absolute  speed  barrier  set  by  light.  it  is  important  to
realize that this limit applies not only to material objects but also to signals and influences of any
kind. there is simply no way to communicate information or a disturbance from one place to another
at faster than light speed. of course, the world is full of ways for transmitting disturbances at slower
than the speed of light. your speech and all other sounds, for example, are carried by vibrations that
travel at about 700 miles per hour through air, a feeble rate compared with light's 670 million miles
per hour. this speed difference becomes obvious when you watch a baseball game, from seats that
are far from home plate. when a batter hits the ball, the sound reaches you moments after you see the
ball being hit. a similar thing happens in a thunderstorm. although lightning and thunder are produced
simultaneously, you see the lightning before hearing the thunder. again, this reflects the substantial
speed difference between light and sound. the success of special relativity informs us that the reverse
situation,  in  which  some  signal  reaches  us before  the  light  it  emits,  is  just  not  possible.  nothing
outruns photons.

here's the rub. in newton's theory of gravity, one body exerts a gravitational pull on another
with  a  strength  determined  solely  by  the  mass  of  the  objects  involved  and  the  magnitude  of  their
separation.  the  strength  has  nothing  to  do  with  how  long  the  objects  have  been  in  each  other's
presence. this means that if their mass or their separation should change, the objects will, according
to newton, immediately feel a change in their mutual gravitational attraction. for instance, newton's
theory of gravity claims that if the sun were suddenly to explode, the earth—some 93 million miles
away—would instantaneously suffer a departure from its usual elliptical orbit. even though it would
take  light  from  the  explosion  eight  minutes  to  travel  from  the  sun  to  the  earth,  in  newton's  theory
knowledge that the sun had exploded would be instantaneously transmitted to the earth through the

sudden change in the gravitational force governing its motion.

this  conclusion  is  in  direct  conflict  with  special  relativity,  since  the  latter  ensures  that  no
information can be transmitted faster than the speed of light—instantaneous transmission violates this
precept maximally.

in  the  early  part  of  the  twentieth  century,  therefore,  einstein  realized  that  the  tremendously
successful newtonian theory of gravity was in conflict with his special theory of relativity. confident
in  the  veracity  of  special  relativity  and  notwithstanding  the  mountain  of  experimental  support  for
newton's  theory,  einstein  sought  a  new  theory  of  gravity  compatible  with  special  relativity.  this
ultimately led him to the discovery of general relativity, in which the character of space and time
again went through a remarkable transformation.

einstein's happiest thought

even  before  the  discovery  of  special  relativity,  newton's  theory  of  gravity  was  lacking  in  one
important respect. although it can be used to make highly accurate predictions about how objects will
move under the influence of gravity, it offers no insight into what gravity is. that is, how is it that two
bodies that are physically separate from another, possibly hundreds of millions of miles apart if not
more, nonetheless influence each other's motion? by what means does gravity execute its mission?
this is a problem of which newton himself was well aware. in his own words,

it is inconceivable, that inanimate brute matter, should, without the mediation of something
else,  which  is  not  material,  operate  upon  and  affect  other  matter  without  mutual  contact.
that gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter so that one body may act
upon another at a distance thro' a vacuum without the mediation of anything else, by and
through which their action and force may be conveyed, from one to another, is to me so
great  an  absurdity  that  i  believe  no  man  who  has  in  philosophical  matters  a  competent
faculty of thinking can ever fall into it. gravity must be caused by an agent acting constantly
according to certain laws; but whether this agent be material or immaterial, i have left to
the consideration of my readers.1

that is, newton accepted the existence of gravity and went on to develop equations that accurately
describe its effects, but he never offered any insight into how it actually works. he gave the world an
"owner's  manual"  for  gravity  which  delineated  how  to  "use"  it—instructions  that  physicists,
astronomers,  and  engineers  have  exploited  successfully  to  plot  the  course  of  rockets  to  the  moon,
mars, and other planets in the solar system; to predict solar and lunar eclipses; to predict the motion
of comets, and so on. but he left the inner workings—the contents of the "black box" of gravity—a
complete mystery. when you use your cd player or your personal computer, you may find yourself in
a similar state of ignorance regarding how it works internally. so long as you know how to operate
the equipment neither you nor anyone else needs to know how it accomplishes the tasks you set for it.
but if your cd player or personal computer breaks, its repair relies crucially on knowledge of its
internal workings. similarly, einstein realized that hundreds of years of experimental confirmation
notwithstanding, special relativity implied that in some subtle way newton's theory was "broken" and
that its repair required coming to grips with the question of the true and full nature of gravity.

in  1907,  while  pondering  these  issues  at  his  desk  in  the  patent  office  in  bern,  switzerland,

einstein had the central insight that, through fits and starts, would eventually lead him to a radically
new theory of gravity—an approach that would not merely fill in the gap in newton's theory, but,
rather, would completely reformulate thinking about gravity and, of utmost importance, would do so
in a manner fully consistent with special relativity.

the  insight  einstein  had  is  relevant  for  a  question  that  may  have  troubled  you  in  chapter  2.
there we emphasized that we were interested in understanding how the world appears to individuals
undergoing  constant-velocity  relative  motion.  by  carefully  comparing  the  observations  of  such
individuals, we found some dramatic implications for the nature of space and time. but what about
individuals who are experiencing accelerated motion? the observations of such individuals will be
more complicated to analyze than those of constant-velocity observers, whose motion is more serene,
but  nevertheless  we  can  ask  whether  there  is  some  way  of  taming  this  complexity  and  bringing
accelerated motion squarely into our newfound understanding of space and time.

"in  order  to  launch  the  device  into  outer  space  we  will  have  to  mount  it  on  a  rocket. as  the
rocket accelerates upward in order to penetrate outer space, the reading on the scale will increase,
again causing the device to detonate prematurely. you see, the base of the bomb—which rests on the
scale—will push harder on the scale than when the device is at rest in the same way that your body is
squeezed back into the seat of an accelerating car. the bomb will 'squeeze' the scale just as your back
squeezes the cushion in the car seat. when a scale is squeezed, of course, its reading increases—and
this will cause the bomb to detonate if the resulting increase is more than 50 percent."

you  thank albert  for  his  comment  but,  having  tuned  out  his  explanation  to  mentally  confirm
isaac's remark, you dejectedly proclaim that it takes only one fatal blow to kill an idea, and isaac's
obviously correct observation has definitively done that. feeling somewhat hopeless you ask for new

einstein's "happiest thought" showed how to do so. to understand his insight, imagine the year is
2050,  you  are  the  fbi's  chief  explosives  expert,  and  you  have  just  received  a  frantic  call  to
investigate what appears to be a sophisticated bomb planted in the heart of washington, d.c. after
rushing  to  the  scene  and  examining  the  device,  your  worst  nightmare  is  confirmed:  the  bomb  is
nuclear  and  of  such  powerful  design  that  even  if  it  were  buried  deeply  in  the  earth's  crust  or
submerged  in  an  ocean's  depth,  the  damage  from  its  blast  would  be  devastating.  after  gingerly
studying  the  bomb's  detonation  mechanism  you  realize  that  there  is  no  hope  to  disarm  it  and,
furthermore, you see that it has a novel booby-trap feature. the bomb is mounted on a scale. should
the  reading  on  the  scale  deviate  from  its  present  value  by  more  than  50  percent,  the  bomb  will
detonate. according to the timing mechanism, you see that you have but one week and counting. the
fate of millions of people rests on your shoulders—what do you do?

well, having determined that there is no safe place anywhere on or in the earth to detonate the
device, you appear to have only one option: you must launch the device into the depths of outer space
where its explosion will cause no damage. you present this idea to a meeting of your team at the fbi
and almost immediately your plan is dashed by a young assistant. "there is a serious problem with
your  plan,"  your  assistant  isaac  begins.  "as  the  device  gets  farther  from  the  earth,  its  weight  will
decrease, since its gravitational attraction with the earth will diminish. this means that the reading on
the scale inside the device will decrease, causing detonation well before reaching the safety of deep
space." before you have time to fully contemplate this criticism, another young assistant pipes up: "in
fact, come to think of it, there is even another problem," your assistant albert says. "this problem is
as important as isaac's objection but somewhat more subtle, so bear with me as i explain it." wanting
a moment to think through isaac's objection, you try to hush albert, but as usual, once he begins there
is no stopping him.

suggestions. at that moment, albert has a stunning revelation: "on second thought," he continues, "i
do not think that your idea is dead at all. isaac's observation that gravity diminishes as the device is
lifted into space means that the reading on the scale will go down. my observation that the upward
acceleration of the rocket will cause the device to push harder against the scale means that the reading
will  go up.  taken  together,  this  means  that  if  we  carefully  adjust  the  precise  moment-to-moment
acceleration  of  the  rocket  as  it  moves  upward,  these  two  effects  can cancel  each  other  out!
specifically,  in  the  early  stages  of  liftoff,  when  the  rocket  still  feels  the  full  force  of  the  earth's
gravity, it can accelerate, just not too severely, so that we stay within the 50 percent window. as the
rocket gets farther and farther from the earth—and therefore feels the earth's gravity less and less—
we need to increase its upward acceleration to compensate. the increase in the reading from upward
acceleration  can  exactly  equal  the  decrease  in  the  reading  from  the  diminishing  gravitational
attraction, so, in fact, we can keep the actual reading on the scale from changing at all!"

albert's  suggestion  slowly  begins  to  make  sense.  "in  other  words,"  you  respond,  "an  upward
acceleration can provide a stand-in or a substitute for gravity. we can imitate the effect of gravity
through suitably accelerated motion."

"exactly," responds albert.
"so,"  you  continue,  "we can  launch  the  bomb  into  space  and  by  judiciously  adjusting  the
acceleration of the rocket we can ensure that the reading on the scale does not change, thus avoiding
detonation until it is a safe distance from earth." and so by playing off gravity and accelerated motion
—using the precision of twenty-first-century rocket science—you are able to stave off disaster.

the recognition that gravity and accelerated motion are profoundly interwoven is the key insight
that einstein had one happy day in the bern patent office. although the bomb experience highlights the
essence  of  his  idea,  it  is  worth  rephrasing  it  in  a  framework  closer  to  that  of  chapter  2.  for  this
purpose, recall that if you are put into a sealed, windowless compartment that is not  accelerating,
there  is  no  way  for  you  to  determine  your  speed.  the  compartment  looks  the  same  and  any
experiments  you  do  yield  identical  results  regardless  of  how  fast  you  are  moving.  more
fundamentally, without outside benchmarks for comparison there is no way that a velocity can even be
assigned  to  your  state  of  motion.  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  are  accelerating,  then  even  with  your
perceptions limited to the confines of your sealed compartment, you will feel a force on your body.
for  instance,  if  your  forward-facing  chair  is  bolted  to  the  floor  and  your  compartment  is  being
accelerated forward, you will feel the force of your seat on your back just as with the car described
by albert. similarly, if your compartment is being accelerated upward you will feel the force of the
floor on your feet. einstein's realization was that within the confines of your tiny compartment, you
will not be able to distinguish these accelerated situations from ones without acceleration  but with
gravity: when their magnitudes are judiciously adjusted, the force you feel from a gravitational field
or from accelerated motion are indistinguishable. if your compartment is placidly sitting upright on
the earth's surface, you will feel the familiar force of the floor on your feet, just as in the scenario of
upward  acceleration;  this  is  exactly  the  same  equivalence  albert  exploited  in  his  solution  for
launching the terrorist bomb into space. if your compartment is resting on its back end you will feel
the force of your seat on your back (preventing you from falling), just as when you were accelerating
horizontally.  einstein  called  the  indistinguishability  between  accelerated  motion  and  gravity  the
equivalence principle. it plays a central role in general relativity.2

this  description  shows  that  general  relativity  finishes  a  job  initiated  by  special  relativity.
through  its  principle  of  relativity,  the  special  theory  of  relativity  declares  a  democracy  of
observational  vantage  points:  the  laws  of  physics  appear  identical  to  all  observers  undergoing

constant-velocity motion. but this is limited democracy indeed, for it excludes an enormous number
of other viewpoints—those of individuals who are accelerating. einstein's 1907 insight now shows
us  how  to  embrace all points of view—constant velocity and accelerating—within one egalitarian
framework. since there is no difference between an accelerated vantage point without a gravitational
field  and  a  nonaccelerated  vantage  point with  a  gravitational  field,  we  can  invoke  the  latter
perspective and declare that all observers, regardless of their state of motion, may proclaim that
they  are  stationary  and  "the  rest  of  the  world  is  moving  by  them,"  so  long  as  they  include  a
suitable gravitational field in the description of their own surroundings. in this sense, through the
inclusion of gravity, general relativity ensures that all possible observational vantage points are on
equal footing. (as we shall see later, this means that distinctions between observers in chapter 2 that
relied on accelerated motion—as when george chased after gracie by turning on his jet-pack and
aged less than she—admit an equivalent description without acceleration, but with gravity.)

this  deep  connection  between  gravity  and  accelerated  motion  is  certainly  a  remarkable
realization,  but  why  did  it  make  einstein  so  happy?  the  reason,  simply  put,  is  that  gravity  is
mysterious. it is a grand force permeating the life of the cosmos, but it is elusive and ethereal. on the
other hand, accelerated motion, although somewhat more complicated than constant-velocity motion,
is  concrete  and  tangible.  by  finding  a  fundamental  link  between  the  two,  einstein  realized  that  he
could use his understanding of motion as a powerful tool toward gaining a similar understanding of
gravity.  putting  this  strategy  into  practice  was  no  small  task,  even  for  the  genius  of  einstein,  but
ultimately this approach bore the fruit of general relativity. achieving this end required that einstein
forge a second link in the chain uniting gravity and accelerated motion: the curvature of space and
time, to which we now turn.

acceleration and the warping of space and time

einstein worked on the problem of understanding gravity with extreme, almost obsessive, intensity.
about five years after his happy revelation in the bern patent office, he wrote to the physicist arnold
sommerfeld, "i am now working exclusively on the gravity problem. . .. [o]ne thing is certain—that
never in my life have i tormented myself anything like this. . .. compared to this problem the original
[i.e., special] relativity theory is child's play."3

he appears to have made the next key breakthrough, a simple yet subtle consequence of applying
special relativity to the link between gravity and accelerated motion, in 1912. to understand this step
in  einstein's  reasoning  it  is  easiest  to  focus,  as  apparently  he  did,  on  a  particular  example  of
accelerated motion.4 recall that an object is accelerating if either the speed or the direction of its
motion changes. for simplicity we will focus on accelerated motion in which only the direction of
our object's motion changes while its speed stays fixed. specifically, we consider motion in a circle
such  as  what  one  experiences  on  the  tornado  ride  in  an  amusement  park.  in  case  you  have  never
tested the stability of your constitution on this ride, you stand with your back against the inside of a
circular plexiglas structure that spins at a high speed. like all accelerated motion, you can feel this
motion—you  feel  your  body  being  pulled  radially  away  from  the  ride's  center  and  you  feel  the
circular wall of plexiglas pressing on your back, keeping you moving in a circle. (in fact, although not
relevant for the present discussion, the spinning motion "pins" your body to the plexiglas with such a
force that when the ledge on which you are standing drops away you do not slip downward.) if the
ride is extremely smooth and you close your eyes, the pressure of the ride on your back—like the

support of a bed—can almost make you feel that you are lying down. the "almost" comes from the
fact that you still feel ordinary "vertical" gravity, so your brain cannot be fully fooled. but if you were
to ride the tornado in outer space, and if it were to spin at just the right rate, it would feel just like
lying in a stationary bed on earth. moreover, were you to "get up" and walk along the interior of the
spinning plexiglas, your feet would press against it just as they do against an earthbound floor. in fact,
space stations are designed to spin in this manner to create an artificial feeling of gravity in outer
space.

what about the radius? well, jim also uses the head-to-tail method to find the length of a radial
strut, and from our bird's-eye view we see that he is going to find the same answer as we did. the
reason is that the ruler is not pointing along the instantaneous direction of the motion of the ride (as it
is when measuring the circumference). instead, it is pointed at a ninety-degree angle to the motion,
and  therefore  it  is not  contracted  along  its  length.  jim  will  therefore  find  exactly  the  same  radial
length as we did.

having  used  the  accelerated  motion  of  the  spinning  tornado  to  imitate  gravity,  we  can  now
follow einstein and set out to see how space and time appear to someone on the ride. his reasoning,
adapted  to  this  situation,  went  as  follows.  we  stationary  observers  can  easily  measure  the
circumference and the radius of the spinning ride. for instance, to measure the circumference we can
carefully  lay  out  a  ruler—head  to  tail—alongside  the  ride's  spinning  girth;  for  its  radius  we  can
similarly use the head-to-tail method working our way from the central axle of the ride to its outer
rim. as we anticipate from high-school geometry, we find that their ratio is two times the number pi
—about 6.28—just as it is for any circle drawn on a flat sheet of paper. but what do things look like
from the perspective of someone on the ride itself?

to find out, we ask slim and jim, who are currently enjoying a spin on the tornado, to take a
few  measurements  for  us.  we  toss  one  of  our  rulers  to  slim,  who  sets  out  to  measure  the
circumference of the ride, and another to jim, who sets out to measure the radius. to get the clearest
perspective, let's take a bird's-eye view of the ride, as in figure 3.1. we have adorned this snapshot
of the ride with an arrow that indicates the momentary direction of motion at each point. as slim
begins to measure the circumference, we immediately see from our bird's-eye perspective that he is
going  to  get  a  different  answer  than  we  did. as  he  lays  the  ruler  out  along  the  circumference,  we
notice  that  the  ruler's length is shortened. this is nothing but the lorentz contraction discussed in
chapter 2, in which the length of an object appears shortened along the direction of its motion. a
shorter ruler means that he will have to lay it out—head to tail—more times to traverse the whole
circumference. since he still considers the ruler to be one foot long (since there is no relative motion
between slim and his ruler, he perceives it as having its usual length of one foot), this means that slim
will measure a longer circumference than did we. (if this seems paradoxical, you might find endnote
5 helpful.)

figure 3.1 slim's ruler is contracted, since it lies along the direction of the ride's motion. but jim's
ruler lies along a radial strut, perpendicular to the direction of the ride's motion, and therefore its
length is not contracted.

but now, when slim and jim calculate the ratio of the circumference of the ride to its radius they
will get a number that is larger than our answer of two times pi, since the circumference is longer but
the radius is the same. this is weird. how in the world can something in the shape of a circle violate
the ancient greek realization that for any circle this ratio is exactly two times pi?

here is einstein's explanation. the ancient greek result holds true for circles drawn on a flat
surface. but just as the warped or curved mirrors in an amusement park fun-house distort the normal
spatial relationships of your reflection, if a circle is drawn on a warped or curved surface, its usual
spatial relationships will also be distorted: the ratio of its circumference to its radius will generally
not be two times pi.

for instance, figure 3.2 compares three circles whose radii are identical. notice, however, that
their circumferences are not the same. the circumference of the circle in (b), drawn on the curved
surface of a sphere, is less than the circumference of the circle drawn on the flat surface in (a), even
though they have the same radius. the curved nature of the sphere's surface causes the radial lines of
the  circle  to  converge  toward  each  other  slightly,  resulting  in  a  small  decrease  in  the  circle's
circumference. the circumference of the circle in (c), again drawn on a curved surface—a saddle
shape—is greater than that drawn on a flat surface; the curved nature of the saddle's surface causes
the radial lines of the circle to splay outward from each other slightly, resulting in a small increase in
the circle's circumference. these observations imply that the ratio of the circumference to the radius
of the circle in (b) will be less than two times pi, while the same ratio in (c) will be greater than two
times pi. but this deviation from two times pi, especially the larger value found in (c), is just what we
found for the spinning tornado ride. this led einstein to propose an idea—the curving of space—as
an explanation for the violation of "ordinary," euclidean geometry. the flat geometry of the greeks,
taught to schoolchildren for thousands of years, simply does not apply to someone on the spinning
ride. rather, its curved space generalization as schematically drawn in part (c) of figure 3.2 takes its
place.5

figure 3.2 a circle drawn on a sphere (b) has a shorter circumference than one drawn on a flat sheet
of paper (a), while a circle drawn on the surface of a saddle (c) has a longer circumference, even
though they all have the same radius.

and  so  einstein  realized  that  the  familiar  geometrical  spatial  relationships  codified  by  the
greeks, relationships that pertain to "flat" space figures like a circle on a flat table, do not hold from
the perspective of an accelerated observer. of course, we have discussed only one particular kind of
accelerated motion, but einstein showed that a similar result—the warping of space—holds in all
instances of accelerated motion.

in fact, accelerated motion not only results in a warping of space, it also results in an analogous
warping  of  time.  (historically,  einstein  first  focused  on  the  warping  of  time  and  subsequently
realized the importance of the warping of space.6) on one level, it should not be too surprising that
time  is  also  affected,  since  we  have  already  seen  in  chapter  2  that  special  relativity  articulates  a
union between space and time. this merger was summarized by the poetic words of minkowski, who
during a lecture on special relativity in 1908 said, "henceforward space on its own and time on its
own  will  decline  into  mere  shadows,  and  only  a  kind  of  union  between  the  two  will  preserve  its
independence."7 in more down-to-earth but similarly imprecise language, by knitting space and time
together into the unified structure of spacetime, special relativity declares, "what's true for space is
true  for  time."  but  this  raises  a  question:  whereas  we  can  picture  warped  space  by  its  having  a
curved shape, what do we really mean by warped time?

to get a feel for the answer, let's once again impose upon slim and jim on the tornado ride and
ask them to carry out the following experiment. slim will stand with his back against the ride, at the
far end of one of the ride's radial struts, while jim will slowly crawl toward him along the strut,
starting from the ride's center. every few feet, jim will stop his crawling and the two brothers are to
compare  the  readings  on  their  watches.  what  will  they  find?  from  our  stationary,  bird's-eye
perspective,  we  can  again  predict  the  answer:  their  watches  will  not  agree.  we  come  to  this
conclusion because we realize that slim and jim are travelling at different speeds—on the tornado
ride, the farther out along a radial strut you are, the farther you must travel to complete one rotation,
and therefore the faster you must go. but from special relativity, the faster you go, the slower your
watch ticks, and hence we realize that slim's watch will tick more slowly than jim's. furthermore,
slim and jim will find that, as jim gets closer to slim, the ticking rate of jim's watch will slow down,
approaching that of slim's. this reflects the fact that as jim gets farther out along the strut, his circular
speed increases toward that of slim.

we conclude that to observers on the spinning ride, such as slim and jim, the rate of passage of
time depends upon their precise position—in this case, their distance from the center of the ride. this
is an illustration of what we mean by warped time: time is warped if its rate of passage differs from
one location to another. and of particular importance to our present discussion, jim will also notice
something  else  as  he  crawls  out  along  the  strut.  he  will  feel  an  increasingly  strong  outward  pull

because not only does speed increase, but his acceleration increases as well, the farther he is from the
spinning  ride's  center.  on  the  tornado  ride,  then,  we  see  that  greater  acceleration  is  tied  up  with
slower clocks—that is, greater acceleration results in a more significant warping of time.

these  observations  took  einstein  to  the  final  leap.  since  he  had  already  shown  gravity  and
accelerated motion to be effectively indistinguishable, and since he now had shown that accelerated
motion  is  associated  with  the  warping  of  space  and  time,  he  made  the  following  proposal  for  the
innards of the "black box" of gravity—the mechanism by which gravity operates. gravity, according
to einstein, is the warping of space and time. let's see what this means.

the basics of general relativity

to get a feel for this new view of gravity, let's consider the prototypical situation of a planet, such as
the earth, revolving around a star, such as the sun. in newtonian gravity the sun keeps the earth in
orbit with an unidentified gravitational "tether" that somehow instantaneously reaches out across vast
distances of space and grabs hold of the earth (and, similarly, the earth reaches out and grabs hold of
the sun). einstein provided a new conception of what actually happens. it will aid in our discussion
of  einstein's  approach  to  have  a  concrete  visual  model  of  spacetime  that  we  can  conveniently
manipulate. to do so, we will simplify things in two ways. first, for the moment, we will ignore time
and focus solely on a visual model of space. we will reincorporate time in our discussion shortly.
second, in order to allow us to draw and manipulate visual images on the pages of this book, we will
often refer to a two-dimensional analog of three-dimensional space. most of the insight we gain from
thinking  in  terms  of  this  lower-dimensional  model  is  directly  applicable  to  the  physical  three-
dimensional setting, so the simpler model provides a powerful pedagogical device.

in  figure  3.3,  we  make  use  of  these  simplifications  and  draw  a  two-dimensional  model  of  a
spatial  region  of  our  universe.  the  grid-like  structure  indicates  a  convenient  means  of  specifying
positions just as a street grid gives a means of specifying locations in a city. in a city, of course, one
gives  an  address  by  specifying  a  location  on  the  two-dimensional  street  grid  and  also  giving  a
location in the vertical direction, such as a floor number. it is the latter information, location in the
third spatial dimension, that our two-dimensional analogy suppresses for visual clarity.

figure 3.3 a schematic representation of flat space.

in the absence of any matter or energy, einstein envisioned that space would be flat. in our two-
dimensional model, this means that the "shape" of space should be like the surface of a smooth table,

as drawn in figure 3.3. this is the image of our spatial universe commonly held for thousands of
years.  but  what  happens  to  space  if  a  massive  object  like  the  sun  is  present?  before  einstein  the
answer  was nothing; space (and time) were thought to provide an inert theater, merely setting the
stage on which the events of the universe play themselves out. the chain of einstein's reasoning that
we have been following, however, leads to a different conclusion.

a massive body like the sun, and indeed any body, exerts a gravitational force on other objects.
in the example of the terrorist bomb, we learned that gravitational forces are indistinguishable from
accelerated motion. in the example of the tornado ride, we learned that a mathematical description of
accelerated motion requires the relations of curved space. these links between gravity, accelerated
motion, and curved space led einstein to the remarkable suggestion that the presence of mass, such as
the sun, causes the fabric of space around it to warp, as shown in figure 3.4. a useful, and oft-quoted,
analogy is that much like a rubber membrane on which a bowling ball has been placed, the fabric of
space  becomes  distorted  due  to  the  presence  of  a  massive  object  like  the  sun. according  to  this
radical  proposal,  space  is  not  merely  a  passive  forum  providing  the  arena  for  the  events  of  the
universe; rather, the shape of space responds to objects in the environment.

figure 3.4 a massive body like the sun causes the fabric of space to warp, somewhat like the effect
of a bowling ball placed on a rubber sheet.

this warping, in turn, affects other objects moving in the vicinity of the sun, as they now must
traverse the distorted spatial fabric. using the rubber membrane–bowling ball analogy, if we place a
small ball-bearing on the membrane and set it off with some initial velocity, the path it will follow
depends on whether or not the bowling ball is sitting in the center. if the bowling ball is absent, the
rubber membrane will be flat and the ball bearing will travel along a straight line. if the bowling ball
is present and thereby warps the membrane, the ball bearing will travel along a curved path. in fact,
ignoring friction, if we set the ball bearing moving with just the right speed in just the right direction,
it will continue to move in a recurring curved path around the bowling ball—in effect, it will "go into
orbit." our language presages the application of this analogy to gravity.

the sun, like the bowling ball, warps the fabric of space surrounding it, and the earth's motion,
like that of the ball bearing, is determined by the shape of the warp. the earth, like the ball bearing,
will move in orbit around the sun if its speed and orientation have suitable values. this effect on the
motion of the earth is what we normally would refer to as the gravitational influence of the sun, and is
illustrated  in  figure  3.5.  the  difference,  now,  is  that  unlike  newton,  einstein  has  specified  the
mechanism by which gravity is transmitted: the warping of space. in einstein's view, the gravitational
tether holding the earth in orbit is not some mysterious instantaneous action of the sun; rather, it is the

warping of the spatial fabric caused by the sun's presence.

figure 3.5 the earth is kept in orbit around the sun because it rolls along a valley in the warped
spatial fabric. in more precise language, it follows a "path of least resistance" in the distorted region
around the sun.

this picture allows us to understand the two essential features of gravity in a new way. first, the
more massive the bowling ball, the greater the distortion it causes in the rubber membrane; similarly,
in einstein's description of gravity the more massive an object is, the greater the distortion it causes
in the surrounding space. this implies that the more massive an object, the greater the gravitational
influence it can exert on other bodies, precisely in accord with our experiences. second, just as the
distortion of the rubber membrane due to the bowling ball gets smaller as one gets farther from it, the
amount of spatial warping due to a massive body such as the sun decreases as one's distance from it
increases. this, again, jibes with our understanding of gravity, whose influence becomes weaker as
the distance between objects becomes larger.

an important point to note is that the ball bearing itself warps the rubber membrane, although
only slightly. similarly, the earth, being a massive body in its own right, also warps the fabric of
space, although far less than the sun. this is how, in the language of general relativity, the earth keeps
the moon in orbit, and it is also how the earth keeps each of us bound to its surface. as a skydiver
plunges earthward, he or she is sliding down a depression in the spatial fabric caused by the earth's
mass.  moreover,  each  of  us—like  any  massive  object—also  warps  the  spatial  fabric  in  close
proximity  to  our  bodies,  although  the  comparatively  small  mass  of  a  human  body  makes  this  a
minuscule indentation.

in summary then, einstein fully agreed with newton's statement that "gravity must be caused by
an  agent"  and  rose  to  newton's  challenge  in  which  the  identity  of  the  agent  was  left  "to  the
consideration of my readers." the agent of gravity, according to einstein, is the fabric of the cosmos.

a few caveats

the  rubber  membrane–bowling  ball  analogy  is  valuable  because  it  gives  us  a  visual  image  with
which we can grasp tangibly what we mean by a warp in the spatial fabric of the universe. physicists
often use this and similar analogies to guide their own intuition regarding gravitation and curvature.
however, its usefulness notwithstanding, the rubber membrane–bowling ball analogy is not perfect
and for clarity we call attention to a few of its shortcomings.

first,  when  the  sun  causes  the  fabric  of  space  around  it  to  warp  this  is  not  due  to  its  "being
pulled downward" by gravity as in the case of the bowling ball, which warps the rubber membrane
because it is pulled earthward by gravity. in the case of the sun, there is no other object to "do the
pulling." instead, einstein has taught us that the warping of space is gravity. the mere presence of an
object with mass causes space to respond by warping. similarly, the earth is not kept in orbit because
the gravitational pull of some other external object guides it along the valleys in the warped spatial
environment, as occurs for a ball bearing on the warped rubber membrane. instead, einstein showed
that objects move through space (spacetime, more precisely) along the shortest possible paths—the
"easiest possible paths" or the "paths of least resistance." if the space is warped, such paths will be
curved. and so, although the rubber membrane–bowling ball model provides a good visual analogy
of how an object such as the sun warps the space around it and thereby influences the motion of other
bodies,  the  physical  mechanism  by  which  these  distortions  occur  is  totally  different.  the  former
appeals  to  our  intuition  about  gravity  in  the  traditional  newtonian  framework,  whereas  the  latter
expresses a reformulation of gravity in terms of curved space.

a second shortcoming of the analogy stems from the rubber membrane's being two-dimensional.
in  reality,  although  harder  to  visualize,  the  sun  (and  all  other  massive  objects)  actually  warps  the
three-dimensional space surrounding it. figure 3.6 is a rough attempt to depict this; all of the space
surrounding  the  sun—"below,"  "on  the  sides,"  on  "top"—suffers  the  same  kind  of  distortion,  and
figure 3.6 schematically shows a partial sampling. a body, like the earth, travels  through the three-
dimensional  warped  spatial  environment  caused  by  the  sun's  presence.  you  may  find  this  figure
troubling—why doesn't the earth slam into the "vertical part" of curved space in the image? bear in
mind, though, that space, unlike the rubber membrane, is not a solid barrier. instead, the warped grids
in the image are but a couple of thin slices through the full three-dimensional warped space in which
you, the earth, and everything else are immersed fully and move freely. perhaps you find that this only
makes the problem seem worse: why don't we feel space if we are immersed within its fabric? but
we do. we feel gravity, and space is the medium by which the gravitational force is communicated.
as  the  eminent  physicist  john  wheeler  has  often  said  in  describing  gravity,  "mass  grips  space  by
telling it how to curve, space grips mass by telling it how to move."8

a third, related shortcoming of the analogy is that we have suppressed the time dimension. we
have done this for visual clarity because, notwithstanding the declaration of special relativity that we
should think of the time dimension on par with the three familiar spatial dimensions, it is significantly
harder to "see" time. but, as illustrated by the example of the tornado ride, acceleration—and hence
gravity—warps both space and time. (in fact, the mathematics of general relativity shows that in the
case of a relatively slow-moving body like the earth revolving around a typical star like the sun, the
warping of time actually has a far more significant impact on the earth's motion than does the warping
of space.) we will return to a discussion of the warping of time after the next section.

figure 3.6 a sampling of the warped three-dimensional space surrounding the sun.

important as these three caveats are, so long as you hold them in the back of your mind, it is
perfectly acceptable to invoke the warped-space image provided by the bowling ball on the rubber
membrane as an intuitive summary of einstein's new view of gravity.

conflict resolution

by introducing space and time as dynamic players, einstein provided a clear conceptual image of
how gravity works. the central question, though, is whether this reformulation of the gravitational
force  resolves  the  conflict  with  special  relativity  that  afflicts  newton's  theory  of  gravity.  it  does.
again, the rubber membrane analogy gives the essential idea. imagine that we have a ball bearing
rolling in a straight line along the flat membrane in the absence of the bowling ball. as we place the
bowling  ball  on  the  membrane  the  motion  of  the  ball  bearing  will  be  affected,  but not
instantaneously. if we were to film this sequence of events and view it in slow motion we would see
that the disturbance caused by the introduction of the bowling ball spreads like ripples in a pond and
eventually reaches the position of the ball bearing. after a short time, transitory oscillations along the
rubber surface would settle down, leaving us with a static warped membrane.

the same is true for the fabric of space. when no mass is present, space is flat, and a small
object will blissfully be at rest or will travel at a constant velocity. if a large mass comes on the
scene, space will warp—but as in the case of the membrane, the distortion will not be instantaneous.
rather, it will spread outward from the massive body, ultimately settling down into a warped shape
that communicates the gravitational pull of the new body. in our analogy, disturbances to the rubber
membrane travel along its extent at a speed dictated by its particular material composition. in the real
setting of general relativity, einstein was able to calculate how fast disturbances to the fabric of the
universe travel and he found that they travel at precisely the speed of light. this means, for instance,
that in the hypothetical example discussed earlier in which the demise of the sun affects the earth by
virtue  of  changes  in  their  mutual  gravitational  attraction,  the  influence  will  not  be  instantaneously
communicated. rather, as an object changes its position or even blows apart, it causes a change in the
distortion of the spacetime fabric that spreads outward at light speed, precisely in keeping with the
cosmic  speed  limit  of  special  relativity.  thus,  we  on  earth  would  visually  learn  of  the  sun's
destruction  at  the  same  moment  that  we  would  feel  the  gravitational  consequences—about  eight
minutes  after  it  explodes.  einstein's  formulation  thereby  resolves  the  conflict;  gravitational
disturbances keep pace with, but do not outrun, photons.

the warping of time, revisited

illustrations such as those of figures 3.2, 3.4, and 3.6 capture the essence of what "warped space"
means.  a  warp  distorts  the  shape  of  space.  physicists  have  invented  analogous  images  to  try  to
convey the meaning of "warped time," but they are significantly more difficult to decipher, so we will
not introduce them here. instead, let's follow up the example of slim and jim on the tornado ride, and
try to get a sense of the experience of gravitationally induced warped time.

to do so, we revisit george and gracie, no longer in the deep darkness of empty space, but

floating near the outskirts of the solar system. they are still each wearing large digital clocks on their
space suits that are initially synchronized. to keep things simple, we ignore the effects of the planets
and consider only the gravitational field of the sun. let's further imagine that a spaceship hovering
near george and gracie has reeled out a long cable extending all the way down to the vicinity of the
sun's  surface.  george  uses  this  cable  to  slowly  lower  himself  toward  the  sun. as  he  does  so,  he
periodically  stops  so  that  he  and  gracie  can  compare  the  rate  at  which  time  is  elapsing  on  their
clocks.  the  warping  of  time  predicted  by  einstein's  general  relativity  implies  that  george's  clock
will  run  slower  and  slower  compared  with  gracie's  as  the  gravitational  field  he  experiences  gets
stronger and stronger. that is, the closer he gets to the sun the slower his clock will run. it is in this
sense that gravity distorts time as well as space.

you should note that unlike the case in chapter 2 in which george and gracie were in empty
space moving relative to each other with constant velocity, in the present setting there is no symmetry
between them. george, unlike gracie, feels the force of gravity getting stronger and stronger—he has
to hold the cable tighter and tighter as he gets closer to the sun to avoid being pulled in. each of them
agrees that george's clock is running slow. there is no "equally valid perspective" that exchanges
their roles and reverses this conclusion. this is, in fact, what we found in chapter 2 when george
experienced  an  acceleration  by  turning  on  his  jet-pack  to  catch  up  with  gracie.  the  acceleration
george felt resulted in his clock definitively running slow relative to gracie's. since we now know
that feeling accelerated motion is the same as feeling a gravitational force, the present situation of
george on the cable involves the same principle, and once again we see that george's clock, and
everything else in his life, runs in slow motion compared with gracie's.

in a gravitational field such as that at the surface of an ordinary star like the sun, the slowing of
clocks  is  quite  small.  if  gracie  stays  put  at  a  billion  miles  from  the  sun,  then  when  george  has
climbed to within a few miles of its surface, the rate of ticking of his clock will be about 99.9998
percent of gracie's. slower, but not by much.9 if, however, george lowered himself on a cable so that
he hovered just above the surface of a neutron star whose mass, roughly equal to that of the sun, is
crushed  to  a  density  some  million  billion  times  that  of  solar  density,  the  larger  gravitational  field
would cause his clock to tick at about 76 percent of the rate of gracie's. stronger gravitational fields,
such as those just outside a black hole (as discussed below), cause the flow of time to slow even
further; stronger gravitational fields cause a more severe warping of time.

experimental verification of general relativity

most people who study general relativity are captivated by its aesthetic elegance. by replacing the
cold,  mechanistic  newtonian  view  of  space,  time,  and  gravity  with  a  dynamic  and  geometric
description involving curved spacetime, einstein wove gravity into the basic fabric of the universe.
rather than being imposed as an additional structure, gravity becomes part and parcel of the universe
at its most fundamental level. breathing life into space and time by allowing them to curve, warp, and
ripple results in what we commonly refer to as gravity.

aesthetics  aside,  the  ultimate  test  of  a  physical  theory  is  its  ability  to  explain  and  predict
physical  phenomena  accurately.  since  its  inception  in  the  late  1600s  until  the  beginning  of  this
century,  newton's  theory  of  gravity  passed  this  test  with  flying  colors.  whether  applied  to  balls
thrown up in the air, objects dropped from leaning towers, comets whirling around the sun, or planets
going  about  their  solar  orbits,  newton's  theory  provides  extremely  accurate  explanations  of  all

observations  as  well  as  predictions  that  have  been  verified  innumerable  times  in  a  wealth  of
situations.  the  motivation  for  questioning  this  experimentally  successful  theory,  as  we  have
emphasized, was its property of instantaneous transmission of the gravitational force, in conflict with
special relativity.

the effects of special relativity, although central to a fundamental understanding of space, time,
and  motion,  are  extremely  small  in  the  slow-velocity  world  we  typically  inhabit.  similarly,  the
deviations  between  einstein's  general  relativity—a  theory  of  gravity  compatible  with  special
relativity—and newton's theory of gravity are also extremely small in most common situations. this
is both good and bad. it is good because any theory purporting to supplant newton's theory of gravity
had  better  closely  agree  with  it  when  applied  in  those  arenas  in  which  newton's  theory  has  been
experimentally verified. it is bad because it makes it difficult to adjudicate between the two theories
experimentally. distinguishing between newton's and einstein's theories requires extremely precise
measurements applied to experiments that are very sensitive to the ways in which the two theories
differ. if you throw a baseball, newtonian and einsteinian gravity can be used to predict where it
will  land,  and  the  answers  will  be  different,  but  the  differences  will  be  so  slight  that  they  are
generally beyond our capacity to detect experimentally. a more clever experiment is called for, and
einstein suggested one.10

we see stars at night, but of course they are also there during the day. we usually don't see them
because their distant, pinpoint light is overwhelmed by the light emitted by the sun. during a solar
eclipse, however, the moon temporarily blocks the light of the sun and distant stars become visible.
nevertheless, the presence of the sun still has an effect. light from some of the distant stars must pass
close to the sun on the way to earth. einstein's general relativity predicts that the sun will cause the
surrounding  space  and  time  to  warp  and  such  distortion will  influence  the  path  taken  by  the
starlight. after all, the photons of distant origin travel along the fabric of the universe; if the fabric is
warped, the motion of the photons will be affected much as for a material body. the bending of the
path of light is greatest for those light signals that just graze the sun on their way to earth. a solar
eclipse makes it possible to see such sun-grazing starlight without its being completely obscured by
sunlight itself.

the angle through which the light path is bent can be measured in a simple way. the bending of
the starlight's path results in a shift in the apparent position of the star. the shift can be accurately
measured  by  comparing  this  apparent  position  with  the  star's actual  location  known  from
observations of the star at night (in the absence of the sun's warping influence), carried out when the
earth is at an appropriate position, some six months earlier or later. in november of 1915, einstein
used his new understanding of gravity to calculate the angle through which starlight signals that just
graze the sun would be bent and found the answer to be about.00049 of a degree (1.75 arcseconds,
where an arcsecond is 1/3600 of a degree). this tiny angle is equal to that subtended by a quarter
placed upright and viewed from nearly two miles away. the detection of such a small angle was,
however, within reach of the technology of the day. at the urging of sir frank dyson, director of the
greenwich observatory, sir arthur eddington, a well-known astronomer and secretary of the royal
astronomical society in england, organized an expedition to the island of principe off the coast of
west africa to test einstein's prediction during the solar eclipse of may 29, 1919.

on november 6, 1919, after some five months of analysis of the photographs taken during the
eclipse at principe (and of other photographs of the eclipse taken by a second british team led by
charles davidson and andrew crommelin in sobral, brazil), it was announced at a joint meeting of
the  royal  society  and  the  royal astronomical  society  that  einstein's  prediction  based  on  general

relativity had been confirmed. it took little time for word of this success—a complete overturning of
previous  conceptions  of  space  and  time—to  spread  well  beyond  the  confines  of  the  physics
community, making einstein a celebrated figure worldwide. on november 7, 1919, the headline in
the  london times  read  "revolution  in  science—new  theory  of  the  universe—
newtonian ideas overthrown."11 this was einstein's moment of glory.

in the years following this experiment, eddington's confirmation of general relativity came under
some  critical  scrutiny.  numerous  difficult  and  subtle  aspects  of  the  measurement  made  it  hard  to
reproduce  and  raised  some  questions  regarding  the  trustworthiness  of  the  original  experiment.
nevertheless, in the last 40 years a variety of experiments making use of technological advancements
have tested numerous aspects of general relativity with great precision. the predictions of general
relativity have been uniformly confirmed. there is no longer any doubt that einstein's description of
gravity is not only compatible with special relativity, but yields predictions closer to experimental
results than those of newton's theory.

black holes, the big bang, and the expansion of space

whereas special relativity is most manifest when things are moving fast, general relativity comes into
its own when things are very massive and the warps in space and time are correspondingly severe.
let's describe two examples.

the  first  is  a  discovery  made  by  the  german  astronomer  karl  schwarzschild  while  studying
einstein's  revelations  on  gravity  in  between  his  own  calculations  of  artillery  trajectories  at  the
russian  front  during  world  war  i  in  1916.  remarkably,  just  months  after  einstein  had  put  the
finishing touches on general relativity, schwarzschild was able to use the theory to gain a complete
and exact understanding of the way space and time warp in the vicinity of a perfectly spherical star.
schwarzschild  sent  his  results  from  the  russian  front  to  einstein,  who  presented  them  on
schwarzschild's behalf to the prussian academy.

beyond  confirming  and  making  mathematically  precise  the  warping  that  was  schematically
illustrated  in  figure  3.5,  schwarzschild's  work—which  has  now  come  to  be  known  as
"schwarzschild's solution"—revealed a stunning implication of general relativity. he showed that if
the mass of a star is concentrated in a small enough spherical region, so that its mass divided by its
radius exceeds a particular critical value, the resulting spacetime warp is so radical that anything,
including light, that gets too close to the star will be unable to escape its gravitational grip. since not
even  light  can  escape  such  "compressed  stars,"  they  were  initially  called dark  or frozen  stars. a
more  catchy  name  was  coined  years  later  by  john  wheeler,  who  called  them black  holes—black
because  they  cannot  emit  light,  holes  because  anything  getting  too  close  falls  into  them,  never  to
return. the name stuck.

we illustrate schwarzschild's solution in figure 3.7. although black holes have a reputation for
rapacity, objects that pass by them at a "safe" distance are deflected in much the same way that they
would be by an ordinary star, and can proceed on their merry way. but objects of any composition
whatsoever that get too close—closer than what has been termed the black hole's event horizon—are
doomed: they will be drawn inexorably toward the center of the black hole and subject to an ever
increasing  and  ultimately  destructive  gravitational  strain.  for  example,  if  you  dropped  feet  first
through the event horizon, as you approached the black hole's center you would find yourself getting
increasingly uncomfortable. the gravitational force of the black hole would increase so dramatically

that its pull on your feet would be much stronger than its pull on your head (since in a feet-first fall
your feet are always a bit closer than your head to the black hole's center); so much stronger, in fact,
that you would be stretched with a force that would quickly tear your body to shreds.

figure 3.7 a black hole warps the surrounding spacetime fabric so severely that anything that comes
within its "event horizon"—illustrated by the dark circle—can't escape from its gravitational grip. no
one knows exactly what happens at the deepest interior point of a black hole.

if, on the contrary, you were more prudent in your wanderings near a black hole and took great
care  not  to  trespass  beyond  the  event  horizon,  you  could  make  use  of  the  black  hole  for  a  rather
amazing feat. imagine, for example, that you were to discover a black hole whose mass was about
1,000 times the mass of the sun, and that you were to lower yourself on a cable, much as george did
near  the  sun,  to  about  an  inch  above  the  black  hole's  event  horizon.  as  we  have  discussed,
gravitational fields cause a warping of time, and this means that your passage through time would
slow down. in fact, since black holes have such strong gravitational fields, your passage through time
would  slow way down. your watch would tick about ten thousand times more slowly than those of
your  friends  back  on  earth.  if  you  were  to  hover  just  above  the  black  hole's  event  horizon  in  this
manner  for  a  year,  and  then  climb  up  the  cable  to  your  waiting  starship  for  a  short,  yet  leisurely,
journey home, upon arrival at earth you would find that more than ten thousand years had passed since
your initial departure. you would have successfully used the black hole as a kind of time machine,
allowing you to travel to earth's distant future.

to get a sense of the extreme scales involved, a star with the mass of the sun would be a black
hole if its radius were not its actual value (about 450,000 miles), but, instead, just under 2 miles.
imagine: the whole of the sun squeezed to fit comfortably within upper manhattan. a teaspoonful of
such a compressed sun would weigh about as much as mount everest. to make a black hole out of the
earth we would need to crush it into a sphere whose radius is less than half an inch. for a long time
physicists  were  skeptical  about  whether  such  extreme  configurations  of  matter  could  ever  actually
occur, and many thought that black holes were merely a reflection of an overworked theoretician's
imagination.

nevertheless, during the last decade, an increasingly convincing body of experimental evidence
for  the  existence  of  black  holes  has  accumulated.  of  course,  since  they  are  black,  they  cannot  be
observed directly by scanning the sky with telescopes. instead, astronomers search for black holes by
seeking anomalous behavior of other more ordinary light-emitting stars that may be positioned just
outside a black hole's event horizon. for instance, as dust and gas from the outer layers of nearby

ordinary stars fall toward the event horizon of a black hole, they are accelerated to nearly the speed
of light. at such speeds, friction within the maelstrom of downward-swirling material generates an
enormous  amount  of  heat,  causing  the  dust-gas  mixture  to  "glow,"  giving  off  both  ordinary  visible
light and x rays. since this radiation is produced just outside the event horizon, it can escape the
black  hole  and  travel  through  space  to  be  observed  and  studied  directly.  general  relativity  makes
detailed  predictions  about  properties  that  such  x  ray  emissions  will  have;  observation  of  these
predicted  properties  gives  strong,  albeit  indirect,  evidence  for  the  existence  of  black  holes.  for
example, mounting evidence indicates that there is a very massive black hole, some two and a half
million times as massive as the sun, sitting in the center of our own milky way galaxy. and even this
seemingly gargantuan black hole pales in comparison to what astronomers believe to reside in the
core  of  the  astonishingly  luminous  quasars  that  are  scattered  throughout  the  cosmos:  black  holes
whose masses may well be billions of times that of the sun.

schwarzschild  died  only  a  few  months  after  finding  his  solution,  from  a  skin  disease  he
contracted at the russian front. he was 42. his tragically brief encounter with einstein's theory of
gravity uncovered one of the most striking and mysterious facets of the natural world.

the  second  example  in  which  general  relativity  flexes  its  muscle  concerns  the  origin  and
evolution of the whole universe. as we have seen, einstein showed that space and time respond to the
presence of mass and energy. this distortion of spacetime affects the motion of other cosmic bodies
moving in the vicinity of the resulting warps. in turn, the precise way in which these bodies move, by
virtue of their own mass and energy, has a further effect on the warping of spacetime, which further
affects the motion of the bodies, and on and on the interconnected cosmic dance goes. through the
equations  of  general  relativity,  equations  rooted  in  geometrical  insights  into  curved  space
spearheaded  by  the  great  nineteenth-century  mathematician  georg  bernhard  riemann  (more  about
riemann  later),  einstein  was  able  to  describe  the  mutual  evolution  of  space,  time,  and  matter
quantitatively.  to  his  great  surprise,  when  the  equations  are  applied  beyond  an  isolated  context
within  the  universe,  such  as  a  planet  or  a  comet  orbiting  a  star,  to  the  universe  as  a  whole,  a
remarkable conclusion is reached: the overall size of the spatial universe must be changing in time.
that is, either the fabric of the universe is stretching or it is shrinking, but it is not simply staying put.
the equations of general relativity show this explicitly.

this  conclusion  was  too  much  even  for  einstein.  he  had  overturned  the  collective  intuition
regarding the nature of space and time built up through everyday experiences over thousands of years,
but the notion of an always existing, never changing universe was too ingrained for even this radical
thinker to abandon. for this reason, einstein revisited his equations and modified them by introducing
something  known  as  a cosmological  constant,  an  additional  term  that  allowed  him  to  avoid  this
prediction and once again bask in the comfort of a static universe. however, 12 years later, through
detailed measurements of distant galaxies, the american astronomer edwin hubble experimentally
established that the universe is expanding. in a now-famous story in the annals of science, einstein
then returned to the original form of his equations, citing his temporary modification of them as the
biggest  blunder  of  his  life.12  his  initial  unwillingness  to  accept  the  conclusion  notwithstanding,
einstein's theory predicted the expansion of the universe. in fact, in the early 1920s—years before
hubble's  measurements—the  russian  meteorologist  alexander  friedmann  had  used  einstein's
original equations to show, in some detail, that all galaxies would be carried along on the substrate of
stretching spatial fabric, thereby speedily moving away from all others. hubble's observations and
numerous subsequent ones have thoroughly verified this astonishing conclusion of general relativity.
by offering the explanation for the expansion of the universe, einstein achieved one of the greatest

intellectual feats of all time.

if  the  fabric  of  space  is  stretching,  thereby  increasing  the  distance  between  galaxies  that  are
carried along on the cosmic flow, we can imagine running the evolution backward in time to learn
about the origin of the universe. in reverse, the fabric of space shrinks, bringing all galaxies closer
and closer to each other. like the contents of a pressure cooker, as the shrinking universe compresses
the galaxies together, the temperature dramatically increases, stars disintegrate and a hot plasma of
matter's  elementary  constituents  is  formed. as  the  fabric  continues  to  shrink,  the  temperature  rises
unabated, as does the density of the primordial plasma. as we imagine running the clock backward
from the age of the presently observed universe, about 15 billion years, the universe as we know it is
crushed  to  an  ever  smaller  size.  the  matter  making  up everything—every  car,  house,  building,
mountain on earth; the earth itself; the moon; saturn, jupiter, and every other planet; the sun and every
other star in the milky way; the andromeda galaxy with its 100 billion stars and each and every other
of the more than 100 billion galaxies—is squeezed by a cosmic vise to astounding density. and as the
clock is turned back to ever earlier times, the whole of the cosmos is compressed to the size of an
orange, a lemon, a pea, a grain of sand, and to yet tinier size still. extrapolating all the way back to
"the beginning," the universe would appear to have begun as a point—an image we will critically re-
examine  in  later  chapters—in  which  all  matter  and  energy  is  squeezed  together  to  unimaginable
density and temperature. it is believed that a cosmic fireball, the big bang, erupted from this volatile
mixture spewing forth the seeds from which the universe as we know it evolved.

the image of the big bang as a cosmic explosion ejecting the material contents of the universe
like shrapnel from an exploding bomb is a useful one to bear in mind, but it is a little misleading.
when a bomb explodes, it does so at a particular location in space  and  at  a  particular  moment in
time.  its  contents  are  ejected  into  the  surrounding  space.  in  the  big  bang,  there  is  no  surrounding
space. as  we  devolve  the  universe  backward  toward  the  beginning,  the  squeezing  together  of  all
material content occurs because all of space is shrinking. the orange-size, the pea-size, the grain of
sand–size  devolution  describes  the whole  of  the  universe—not  something  within  the  universe.
carrying  on  to  the  beginning,  there  is  simply  no  space  outside  the  primordial  pinpoint  grenade.
instead, the big bang is the eruption of compressed space whose unfurling, like a tidal wave, carries
along matter and energy even to this day.

is general relativity right?

no deviations from the predictions of general relativity have been found in experiments performed
with  our  present  level  of  technology.  only  time  will  tell  if  greater  experimental  precision  will
ultimately uncover some, thereby showing this theory, too, to be only an approximate description of
how nature actually works. the systematic testing of theories to greater and greater levels of accuracy
is, certainly, one of the ways science progresses, but it is not the only way. in fact, we have already
seen this: the search for a new theory of gravity was initiated, not by an experimental refutation of
newton's  theory,  but  rather  by  the  conflict  of  newtonian  gravity  with  another theory—special
relativity. it was only after the discovery of general relativity as a competing theory of gravity that
experimental flaws in newton's theory were identified by seeking out tiny but measurable ways in
which the two theories differ. thus, internal theoretical inconsistencies can play as pivotal a role in
driving progress as do experimental data.

for  the  last  half  century,  physics  has  been  faced  with  still  another  theoretical  conflict  whose

severity  is  on  par  with  that  between  special  relativity  and  newtonian  gravity.  general  relativity
appears  to  be  fundamentally  incompatible  with  another  extremely  well-tested  theory: quantum
mechanics.  regarding  the  material  covered  in  this  chapter,  the  conflict  prevents  physicists  from
understanding  what  really  happens  to  space,  time,  and  matter  when  crushed  together  fully  at  the
moment of the big bang or at the central point of a black hole. but more generally, the conflict alerts
us to a fundamental deficiency in our conception of nature. the resolution of this conflict has eluded
attempts  by  some  of  the  greatest  theoretical  physicists,  giving  it  a  well-deserved  reputation  as the
central problem of modern theoretical physics. understanding the conflict requires familiarity with
some basic features of quantum theory, to which we now turn.

chapter 4

microscopic weirdness

a bit worn out from their trans-solar-system expedition, george and gracie return to earth and head
over  to  the  h-bar  for  some  post-space-sojourning  refreshments.  george  orders  the  usual—papaya
juice  on  the  rocks  for  himself  and  a  vodka  tonic  for  gracie—and  kicks  back  in  his  chair,  hands
clasped  behind  his  head,  to  enjoy  a  freshly  lit  cigar.  just  as  he  prepares  to  inhale,  though,  he  is
stunned  to  find  that  the  cigar  has  vanished  from  between  his  teeth.  thinking  that  the  cigar  must
somehow have slipped from his mouth, george sits forward expecting to find it burning a hole in his
shirt or trousers. but it is not there. the cigar is not to be found. gracie, roused by george's frantic
movement,  glances  over  and  spots  the  cigar  lying  on  the  counter  directly behind  george's  chair.
"strange,"  george  says,  "how  in  the  heck  could  it  have  fallen  over  there?  it's  as  if  it  went  right
through  my  head—but  my  tongue  isn't  burned  and  i  don't  seem  to  have  any  new  holes."  gracie
examines george and reluctantly confirms that his tongue and head appear to be perfectly normal. as
the drinks have just arrived, george and gracie shrug their shoulders and chalk up the fallen cigar to
one of life's little mysteries. but the weirdness at the h-bar continues.

george looks into his papaya juice and notices that the ice cubes are incessantly rattling around
—bouncing off of each other and the sides of the glass like overcharged automobiles in a bumper-car
arena.  and  this  time  he  is  not  alone.  gracie  holds  up  her  glass,  which  is  about  half  the  size  of
george's, and both of them see that her ice cubes are bouncing around even more frantically. they can
hardly  make  out  the  individual  cubes  as  they  all  blur  together  into  an  icy  mass.  but  none  of  this
compares  to  what  happens  next. as  george  and  gracie  stare  at  her  rattling  drink  with  wide-eyed
wonderment, they see a single ice cube pass through the side of her glass and drop down to the bar.
they grab the glass and see that it is fully intact; somehow the ice cube went right through the solid
glass without causing any damage. "must be post-space-walk hallucinations," says george. they each
fight off the frenzy of careening ice cubes to down their drinks in one go, and head home to recover.
little  do  george  and  gracie  realize  that  in  their  haste  to  leave,  they  mistook  a  decorative  door
painted on a wall of the bar for the real thing. the patrons of the h-bar, though, are well accustomed
to people passing through walls and hardly take note of george and gracie's abrupt departure.

a century ago, while conrad and freud were illuminating the heart and the soul of darkness, the
german  physicist  max  planck  shed  the  first  ray  of  light  on  quantum  mechanics,  a  conceptual
framework that proclaims, among other things, that the h-bar experiences of george and gracie—
when  scaled  down  to  the  microscopic  realm—need  not  be  attributed  to  clouded  faculties.  such
unfamiliar  and  bizarre  happenings  are  typical  of  how  our  universe,  on  extremely  small  scales,
actually behaves.

the quantum framework

quantum mechanics is a conceptual framework for understanding the microscopic properties of the
universe.  and  just  as  special  relativity  and  general  relativity  require  dramatic  changes  in  our
worldview when things are moving very quickly or when they are very massive, quantum mechanics
reveals that the universe has equally if not more startling properties when examined on atomic and
subatomic distance scales. in 1965, richard feynman, one of the greatest practitioners of quantum
mechanics, wrote,

there was a time when the newspapers said that only twelve men understood the theory of
relativity. i do not believe there ever was such a time. there might have been a time when
only one man did because he was the only guy who caught on, before he wrote his paper.
but after people read the paper a lot of people understood the theory of relativity in one
way or other, certainly more than twelve. on the other hand i think i can safely say that
nobody understands quantum mechanics.1

although  feynman  expressed  this  view  more  than  three  decades  ago,  it  applies  equally  well
today. what he meant is that although the special and general theories of relativity require a drastic
revision of previous ways of seeing the world, when one fully accepts the basic principles underlying
them,  the  new  and  unfamiliar  implications  for  space  and  time  follow  directly  from  careful  logical
reasoning.  if  you  ponder  the  descriptions  of  einstein's  work  in  the  preceding  two  chapters  with
adequate  intensity,  you  will—if  even  for  just  a  moment—recognize  the  inevitability  of  the
conclusions  we  have  drawn.  quantum  mechanics  is  different.  by  1928  or  so,  many  of  the
mathematical formulas and rules of quantum mechanics had been put in place and, ever since, it has
been  used  to  make the most precise and successful numerical predictions in the history of science.
but in a real sense those who use quantum mechanics find themselves following rules and formulas
laid down by the "founding fathers" of the theory—calculational procedures that are straightforward
to carry out—without really understanding why the procedures work or what they really mean. unlike
relativity, few if any people ever grasp quantum mechanics at a "soulful" level.

what are we to make of this? does it mean that on a microscopic level the universe operates in
ways so obscure and unfamiliar that the human mind, evolved over eons to cope with phenomena on
familiar everyday scales, is unable to fully grasp "what really goes on"? or, might it be that through
historical  accident  physicists  have  constructed  an  extremely  awkward  formulation  of  quantum
mechanics  that,  although  quantitatively  successful,  obfuscates  the  true  nature  of  reality?  no  one
knows. maybe some time in the future some clever person will see clear to a new formulation that
will fully reveal the "whys" and the "whats" of quantum mechanics. and then again, maybe not. the
only thing we know with certainty is that quantum mechanics absolutely and unequivocally shows us
that a number of basic concepts essential to our understanding of the familiar everyday world fail to
have  any  meaning  when  our  focus  narrows  to  the  microscopic  realm.  as  a  result,  we  must
significantly modify both our language and our reasoning when attempting to understand and explain
the universe on atomic and subatomic scales.

in the following sections we will develop the basics of this language and describe a number of
the remarkable surprises it entails. if along the way quantum mechanics seems to you to be altogether
bizarre  or  even  ludicrous,  you  should  bear  in  mind  two  things.  first,  beyond  the  fact  that  it  is  a
mathematically coherent theory, the only reason we believe in quantum mechanics is because it yields
predictions  that  have  been  verified  to  astounding  accuracy.  if  someone  can  tell  you  volumes  of
intimate details of your childhood in excruciating detail, it's hard not to believe their claim of being

your long-lost sibling. second, you are not alone in having this reaction to quantum mechanics. it is a
view held to a greater or lesser extent by some of the most revered physicists of all time. einstein
refused  to  accept  quantum  mechanics  fully. and  even  niels  bohr,  one  of  the  central  pioneers  of
quantum  theory  and  one  of  its  strongest  proponents,  once  remarked  that  if  you  do  not  get  dizzy
sometimes when you think about quantum mechanics, then you have not really understood it.

it's too hot in the kitchen

the road to quantum mechanics began with a puzzling problem. imagine that your oven at home is
perfectly insulated, that you set it to some temperature, say 400 degrees fahrenheit, and you give it
enough  time  to  heat  up.  even  if  you  had  sucked  all  the  air  from  the  oven  before  turning  it  on,  by
heating its walls you generate waves of radiation in its interior. this is the same kind of radiation—
heat and light in the form of electromagnetic waves—that is emitted by the surface of the sun, or a
glowing-hot iron poker.

here's  the  problem.  electromagnetic  waves  carry  energy—life  on  earth,  for  example,  relies
crucially  on  solar  energy  transmitted  from  the  sun  to  the  earth  by  electromagnetic  waves.  at  the
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century,  physicists  calculated  the  total  energy  carried  by  all  of  the
electromagnetic  radiation  inside  an  oven  at  a  chosen  temperature.  using  well-established
calculational  procedures  they  came  up  with  a  ridiculous  answer:  for  any  chosen  temperature,  the
total energy in the oven is infinite.

it was clear to everyone that this was nonsense—a hot oven can embody significant energy but
surely  not  an  infinite  amount.  to  understand  the  resolution  proposed  by  planck  it  is  worth
understanding  the  problem  in  a  bit  more  detail.  it  turns  out  that  when  maxwell's  electromagnetic
theory is applied to the radiation in an oven it shows that the waves generated by the hot walls must
have  a whole  number  of  peaks  and  troughs  that  fit  perfectly  between  opposite  surfaces.  some
examples are shown in figure 4.1. physicists use three terms to describe these waves: wavelength,
frequency,  and  amplitude.  the wavelength is the distance between successive peaks or successive
troughs of the waves, as illustrated in figure 4.2. more peaks and troughs mean a shorter wavelength,
as  they  must  all  be  crammed  in  between  the  fixed  walls  of  the  oven.  the frequency  refers  to  the
number of up-and-down cycles of oscillation that a wave completes every second. it turns out that the
frequency  is  determined  by  the  wavelength  and  vice  versa:  longer  wavelengths  imply  lower
frequency; shorter wavelengths imply higher frequency. to see why, think of what happens when you
produce waves by shaking a long rope that is tied down at one end. to generate a long wavelength,
you leisurely shake your end up and down. the frequency of the waves matches the number of cycles
per second your arm goes through and is consequently fairly low. but to generate short wavelengths
you  shake  your  end  more  frantically—more  frequently,  so  to  speak—and  this  yields  a  higher-
frequency wave. finally, physicists use the term amplitude to describe the maximum height or depth
of a wave, as also illustrated in figure 4.2.

in case you find electromagnetic waves a bit abstract, another good analogy to keep in mind are
the waves that are produced by plucking a violin string. different wave frequencies correspond to
different musical notes: the higher the frequency, the higher the note. the amplitude of a wave on a
violin string is determined by how hard you pluck it. a harder pluck means that you put more energy
into the wave disturbance; more energy therefore corresponds to a larger amplitude. you can hear
this, as the resulting tone is louder. similarly, less energy corresponds to a smaller amplitude and a

lower volume of sound.

figure 4.1 maxwell's theory tells us that the radiation waves in an oven have a whole number of
crests and troughs—they fill out complete wave-cycles.

figure  4.2  the  wavelength  is  the  distance  between  successive  peaks  or  troughs  of  a  wave.  the
amplitude is the maximal height or depth of the wave.

by  making  use  of  nineteenth-century  thermodynamics,  physicists  were  able  to  determine  how
much  energy  the  hot  walls  of  the  oven  would  pump  into  electromagnetic  waves  of  each  allowed
wavelength—how hard the walls would, in effect, "pluck" each wave. the result they found is simple
to  state:  each  of  the  allowed  waves—regardless  of  its  wavelength—carries  the  same  amount  of
energy (with the precise amount determined by the temperature of the oven). in other words, all of the
possible wave patterns within the oven are on completely equal footing when it comes to the amount
of energy they embody.

at first this seems like an interesting, albeit innocuous, result. it isn't. it spells the downfall of
what has come to be known as classical physics. the reason is this: even though requiring that all
waves have a whole number of peaks and troughs rules out an enormous variety of conceivable wave
patterns in the oven, there are still an infinite number that are possible—those with ever more peaks
and troughs. since each wave pattern carries the same amount of energy, an infinite number of them
translates into an infinite amount of energy. at the turn of the century, there was a gargantuan fly in the
theoretical ointment.

making lumps at the turn of the century

in 1900 planck made an inspired guess that allowed a way out of this puzzle and would earn him the
1918 nobel prize in physics.2 to get a feel for his resolution, imagine that you and a huge crowd of
people—"infinite" in number—are crammed into a large, cold warehouse run by a miserly landlord.
there is a fancy digital thermostat on the wall that controls the temperature but you are shocked when

you  discover  the  charges  that  the  landlord  levies  for  heat.  if  the  thermostat  is  set  to  50  degrees
fahrenheit everyone must give the landlord $50. if it is set to 55 degrees everyone must pay $55, and
so on. you realize that since you are sharing the warehouse with an infinite number of companions,
the landlord will earn an infinite amount of money if you turn on the heat at all.

but  on  closer  reading  of  the  landlord's  rules  of  payment  you  see  a  loophole.  because  the
landlord is a very busy man he does not want to give change, especially not to an infinite number of
individual tenants. so he works on an honor system. those who can pay exactly what they owe, do so.
otherwise, they pay only as much as they can without requiring change. and so, wanting to involve
everyone but wanting to avoid the exorbitant charges for heat, you compel your comrades to organize
the wealth of the group in the following manner: one person carries all of the pennies, one person
carries  all  of  the  nickels,  one  carries  all  of  the  dimes,  one  carries  all  of  the  quarters,  and  so  on
through dollar bills, five-dollar bills, ten-dollar bills, twenties, fifties, hundreds, thousands, and ever
larger (and unfamiliar) denominations. you brazenly set the thermostat to 80 degrees and await the
landlord's arrival. when he does come, the person carrying pennies goes to pay first and turns over
8,000. the person carrying nickels then turns over 1,600 of them, the person carrying dimes turns
over 800, the person with quarters turns over 320, the person with dollars gives the landlord 80, the
person with five-dollar bills turns over 16, the person with ten-dollar bills gives him 8, the person
with twenties gives him 4, and the person with fifties hands over one (since 2 fifty-dollar bills would
exceed  the  necessary  payment,  thereby  requiring  change).  but  everyone  else  carries  only  a
denomination—a  minimal  "lump"  of  money—that  exceeds  the  required  payment.  therefore  they
cannot pay the landlord and hence rather than getting the infinite amount of money he expected, the
landlord leaves with the paltry sum of $690.

planck made use of a very similar strategy to reduce the ridiculous result of infinite energy in an
oven  to  one  that  is  finite.  here's  how.  planck  boldly  guessed  that  the  energy  carried  by  an
electromagnetic wave in the oven, like money, comes in lumps. the energy can be one times some
fundamental "energy denomination," or two times it, or three times it, and so forth—but that's it. just
as you can't have one-third of a penny or two and a half quarters, planck declared that when it comes
to energy, no fractions are allowed. now, our monetary denominations are determined by the united
states  treasury.  seeking  a  more  fundamental  explanation,  planck  suggested  that  the  energy
denomination  of  a  wave—the  minimal  lump  of  energy  that  it  can  have—is  determined  by  its
frequency. specifically, he posited that the minimum energy a wave can have is proportional to its
frequency: larger frequency (shorter wavelength) implies larger minimum energy; smaller frequency
(longer wavelength) implies smaller minimum energy. roughly speaking, just as gentle ocean waves
are  long  and  luxurious  while  harsh  ones  are  short  and  choppy,  long-wavelength  radiation  is
intrinsically less energetic than short-wavelength radiation.

here's the punch line: planck's calculations showed that this lumpiness of the allowed energy in
each wave cured the previous ridiculous result of infinite total energy. it's not hard to see why. when
an  oven  is  heated  to  some  chosen  temperature,  the  calculations  based  on  nineteenth-century
thermodynamics predicted the common energy that each and every wave would supposedly contribute
to the total. but like those comrades who cannot contribute the common amount of money they each
owe the landlord because the monetary denomination they carry is too large, if the minimum energy a
particular  wave  can  carry  exceeds  the  energy  it  is  supposed  to  contribute,  it  can't  contribute  and
instead  lies  dormant.  since,  according  to  planck,  the  minimum  energy  a  wave  can  carry  is
proportional  to  its  frequency,  as  we  examine  waves  in  the  oven  of  ever  larger  frequency  (shorter
wavelength), sooner or later the minimum energy they can carry is bigger than the expected energy

contribution. like the comrades in the warehouse entrusted with denominations larger than fifty-dollar
bills, these waves with ever-larger frequencies cannot contribute the amount of energy demanded by
nineteenth-century physics. and so, just as only a finite number of comrades are able to contribute to
the total heat payment—leading to a finite amount of total money—only a finite number of waves are
able to contribute to the oven's total energy—again leading to a finite amount of total energy. be it
energy or money, the lumpiness of the fundamental units—and the ever increasing size of these lumps
as we go to higher frequencies or to larger monetary denominations—changes an infinite answer to
one that is finite.3

by eliminating the manifest nonsense of an infinite result, planck had taken an important step. but
what  really  made  people  believe  that  his  guess  had  validity  is  that  the  finite  answer  that  his  new
approach  gave  for  the  energy  in  an  oven  agreed  spectacularly  with  experimental  measurements.
specifically, planck found that by adjusting one parameter that entered into his new calculations, he
could  predict  accurately  the  measured  energy  of  an  oven  for  any  selected  temperature.  this  one
parameter  is  the  proportionality  factor  between  the  frequency  of  a  wave  and  the  minimal  lump  of
energy it can have. planck found that this proportionality factor—now known as planck's  constant
and  denoted h  (pronounced  "h-bar")—is  about  a  billionth  of  a  billionth  of  a  billionth  in  everyday
units.4 the tiny value of planck's constant means that the size of the energy lumps are typically very
small. this is why, for example, it seems to us that we can cause the energy of a wave on a violin
string—and hence the volume of sound it produces—to change continuously. in reality, though, the
energy of the wave passes through discrete steps, a la planck, but the size of the steps is so small that
the discrete jumps from one volume to another appear to be smooth. according to planck's assertion,
the size of these jumps in energy grows as the frequency of the waves gets higher and higher (while
wavelengths get shorter and shorter). this is the crucial ingredient that resolves the infinite-energy
paradox.

as  we  shall  see,  planck's  quantum  hypothesis  does  far  more  than  allow  us  to  understand  the
energy content of an oven. it overturns much about the world that we hold to be self-evident. the
smallness of h confines most of these radical departures from life-as-usual to the microscopic realm,
but if h happened to be much larger than it is, the strange happenings at the h-bar would actually be
commonplace. as we shall see, their microscopic counterparts certainly are.

what are the lumps?

planck  had  no  justification  for  his  pivotal  introduction  of  lumpy  energy.  beyond  the  fact  that  it
worked, neither he nor anyone else could give a compelling reason for why it should be true. as the
physicist george gamow once said, it was as if nature allowed one to drink a whole pint of beer or
no beer at all, but nothing in between.5 in 1905, einstein found an explanation and for this insight he
was awarded the 1921 nobel prize in physics.

einstein came up with his explanation by puzzling over something known as the photoelectric
effect. the german physicist heinrich hertz in 1887 was the first to find that when electromagnetic
radiation—light—shines  on  certain  metals,  they  emit  electrons.  by  itself  this  is  not  particularly
remarkable.  metals  have  the  property  that  some  of  their  electrons  are  only  loosely  bound  within
atoms (which is why they are such good conductors of electricity). when light strikes the metallic
surface it relinquishes its energy, much as it does when it strikes the surface of your skin, causing you
to  feel  warmer.  this  transfered  energy  can  agitate  electrons  in  the  metal,  and  some  of  the  loosely

bound ones can be knocked clear off the surface.

but  the  strange  features  of  the  photoelectric  effect  become  apparent  when  one  studies  more
detailed properties of the ejected electrons. at first sight you would think that as the intensity of the
light—its brightness—is increased, the speed of the ejected electrons will also increase, since the
impinging electromagnetic wave has more energy. but this does not  happen.  rather,  the number of
ejected electrons increases, but their speed stays fixed. on the other hand, it has been experimentally
observed that the speed of the ejected electrons does increase if the frequency of the impinging light
is increased, and, equivalently, their speed decreases if the frequency of the light is decreased. (for
electromagnetic waves in the visible part of the spectrum, an increase in frequency corresponds to a
change  in  color  from  red  to  orange  to  yellow  to  green  to  blue  to  indigo  and  finally  to  violet.
frequencies higher than that of violet are not visible and correspond to ultraviolet and, subsequently,
x rays; frequencies lower than that of red are also not visible, and correspond to infrared radiation.)
in fact, as the frequency of the light used is decreased, there comes a point when the speed of the
emitted  electrons  drops  to  zero  and  they  stop  being  ejected  from  the  surface, regardless  of  the
possibly blinding intensity of the light source. for some unknown reason, the color of the impinging
light beam—not its total energy—controls whether or not electrons are ejected, and if they are, the
energy they have.

to understand how einstein explained these puzzling facts, let's go back to the warehouse, which
has now heated up to a balmy 80 degrees. imagine that the landlord, who hates children, requires
everyone under the age of fifteen to live in the sunken basement of the warehouse, which the adults
can view from a huge wraparound balcony. moreover, the only way any of the enormous number of
basement-bound children can leave the warehouse is if they can pay the guard an 85-cent exit fee.
(this landlord is such an ogre.) the adults, who at your urging have arranged the collective wealth
by denomination as described above, can give money to the children only by throwing it down to them
from the balcony. let's see what happens.

the person carrying pennies begins by tossing a few down, but this is far too meagre a sum for
any of the children to be able to afford the departure fee. and because there is an essentially "infinite"
sea of children all ferociously fighting in a turbulent tumult for the falling money, even if the penny-
entrusted  adult  throws  enormous  numbers  down,  no  individual  child  will  come  anywhere  near
collecting the 85 he or she needs to pay the guard. the same is true for the adults carrying nickels,
dimes,  and  quarters.  although  each  tosses  down  a  staggeringly  large  total  amount  of  money,  any
single child is lucky if he or she gets even one coin (most get nothing at all) and certainly no child
collects the 85 cents necessary to leave. but then, when the adult carrying dollars starts throwing them
down—even  comparatively  tiny  sums,  dollar  by  single  dollar—those  lucky  children  who  catch  a
single bill are able to leave immediately. notice, though, that even as this adult loosens up and throws
down barrels of dollar bills, the number of children who are able to leave increases enormously, but
each has exactly 15 cents left after paying the guard. this is true regardless of the total number of
dollars tossed.

here  is  what  all  this  has  to  do  with  the  photoelectric  effect.  based  on  the  experimental  data
reviewed above, einstein suggested incorporating planck's lumpy picture of wave energy into a new
description of light. a light beam, according to einstein, should actually be thought of as a stream of
tiny  packets—tiny  particles  of  light—which  were  ultimately  christened photons  by  the  chemist
gilbert lewis (an idea we made use of in our example of the light clock of chapter 2). to get a sense
of  scale,  according  to  this  particle  view  of  light,  a  typical  one-hundred-watt  bulb  emits  about  a
hundred  billion  billion  (1020)  photons  per  second.  einstein  used  this  new  conception  to  suggest  a

microscopic  mechanism  underlying  the  photoelectric  effect: an  electron  is  knocked  off  a  metallic
surface, he proposed, if it gets hit by a sufficiently energetic photon. and what determines the energy
of  an  individual  photon?  to  explain  the  experimental  data,  einstein  followed  planck's  lead  and
proposed that the energy of each photon is proportional to the frequency of the light wave (with the
proportionality factor being planck's constant).

now, like the children's minimum departure fee, the electrons in a metal must be jostled by a
photon  posessing  a  certain  minimum  energy  in  order  to  be  kicked  off  the  surface.  (as  with  the
children fighting for money, it is extremely unlikely that any one electron gets hit by more than one
photon—most  don't  get  hit  at  all.)  but  if  the  impinging  light  beam's  frequency  is  too  low,  its
individual photons will lack the punch necessary to eject electrons. just as no children can afford to
leave  regardless  of  the  huge  total  number  of  coins  the  adults  shower  upon  them,  no  electrons  are
jostled free regardless of the huge total energy embodied in the impinging light beam, if its frequency
(and thus the energy of its individual photons) is too low.

but  just  as  children  are  able  to  leave  the  warehouse  as  soon  as  the  monetary  denomination
showered  upon  them  gets  large  enough,  electrons  will  be  knocked  off  the  surface  as  soon  as  the
frequency of the light shone on them—its energy denomination—gets high enough. moreover, just as
the  dollar-entrusted  adult  increases  the  total  money  thrown  down  by  increasing  the  number  of
individual  bills  tossed,  the  total  intensity  of  a  light  beam  of  a  chosen  frequency  is  increased  by
increasing the number of photons it contains. and just as more dollars result in more children being
able to leave, more photons result in more electrons being hit and knocked clear off the surface. but
notice that the leftover energy that each of these electrons has after ripping free of the surface depends
solely on the energy of the photon that hits it—and this is determined by the frequency of the light
beam, not its total intensity. just as children leave the basement with 15 cents no matter how many
dollar bills are thrown down, each electron leaves the surface with the same energy—and hence the
same speed—regardless of the total intensity of the impinging light. more total money simply means
more  children  can  leave;  more  total  energy  in  the  light  beam  simply  means  more  electrons  are
knocked  free.  if  we  want  children  to  leave  the  basement  with  more  money,  we  must  increase  the
monetary denomination tossed down; if we want electrons to leave the surface with greater speed, we
must  increase  the  frequency  of  the  impinging  light  beam—that  is,  we  must  increase  the  energy
denomination of the photons we shine on the metallic surface.

this  is  precisely  in  accord  with  the  experimental  data.  the  frequency  of  the  light  (its  color)
determines the speed of the ejected electrons; the total intensity of the light determines the number of
ejected  electrons. and  so  einstein  showed  that  planck's  guess  of  lumpy  energy  actually  reflects  a
fundamental feature of electromagnetic waves: they are composed of particles—photons—that are
little bundles, or quanta, of light. the lumpiness of the energy embodied by such waves is due to their
being composed of lumps.

einstein's insight represented great progress. but, as we shall now see, the story is not as tidy as

it might appear.

is it a wave or is it a particle?

everyone  knows  that  water—and  hence  water  waves—are  composed  of  a  huge  number  of  water
molecules. so is it really surprising that light waves are also composed of a huge number of particles,
namely photons? it is. but the surprise is in the details. you see, more than three hundred years ago

newton  proclaimed  that  light  consisted  of  a  stream  of  particles,  so  the  idea  is  not  exactly  new.
however,  some  of  newton's  colleagues,  most  notably  the  dutch  physicist  christian  huygens,
disagreed  with  him  and  argued  that  light  is  a  wave.  the  debate  raged  but  ultimately  experiments
carried  out  by  the  english  physicist  thomas young  in  the  early  1800s  showed  that  newton  was
wrong.

a  version  of  young's  experimental  setup—known  as 

the  double-slit  experiment—is
schematically illustrated in figure 4.3. feynman was fond of saying that all of quantum mechanics can
be  gleaned  from  carefully  thinking  through  the  implications  of  this  single  experiment,  so  it's  well
worth discussing. as we see from figure 4.3, light is shone on a thin solid barrier in which two slits
are  cut.  a  photographic  plate  records  the  light  that  gets  through  the  slits—brighter  areas  of  the
photograph  indicate  more  incident  light.  the  experiment  consists  of  comparing  the  images  on
photographic plates that result when either or both of the slits in the barrier are kept open and the light
source is turned on.

figure 4.3 in the double-slit experiment, a beam of light is shone on a barrier in which two slits have
been  cut.  the  light  that  passes  through  the  barrier  is  then  recorded  on  a  photographic  plate,  when
either or both of the slits are open.

figure 4.4 the right slit is open in this experiment, leading to an image on the photographic plate as
shown.

if the left slit is covered and the right slit is open, the photograph looks like that shown in figure
4.4. this makes good sense, since the light that hits the photographic plate must pass through the only
open slit and will therefore be concentrated around the right part of the photograph. similarly, if the
right slit is covered and the left slit open, the photograph will look like that in figure 4.5. if both slits
are open, newton's particle picture of light leads to the prediction that the photographic plate will
look like that in figure 4.6, an amalgam of figures 4.4 and 4.5. in essence, if you think of newton's
corpuscles of light as if they were little pellets you fire at the wall, the ones that get through will be
concentrated  in  the  two  areas  that  line  up  with  the  two  slits.  the  wave  picture  of  light,  on  the
contrary, leads to a very different prediction for what happens when both slits are open. let's see this.

figure 4.5 as in figure 4.4, except now only the left slit is open.

figure 4.6 newton's particle view of light predicts that when both slits are open, the photographic
plate will be a merger of the images in figures 4.4 and 4.5.

imagine for a moment that rather than dealing with light waves we use water waves. the result
we will find is the same, but water is easier to think about. when water waves strike the barrier,
outgoing circular water waves emerge from each slit, much like those created by throwing a pebble
into a pond, as illustrated in figure 4.7. (it is simple to try this using a cardboard barrier with two
slits in a pan of water.) as the waves emerging from each slit overlap with each other, something
quite  interesting  happens.  if  two  wave  peaks  overlap,  the  height  of  the  water  wave  at  that  point
increases: it's the sum of the heights of the two individual peaks. if two wave troughs overlap, the
depth  of  the  water  depression  at  that  point  is  similarly  increased.  and  finally,  if  a  wave  peak
emerging from one slit overlaps with a wave trough emerging from the other, they cancel each other
out. (in fact, this is the idea behind fancy noise-eliminating head-phones—they measure the shape of
the incoming sound wave and then produce another whose shape is exactly "opposite," leading to a
cancellation of the undesired noise.) in between these extreme overlaps—peaks with peaks, troughs
with troughs, and peaks with troughs—are a host of partial height augmentations and cancellations. if
you and a slew of companions form a line of little boats parallel to the barrier and you each declare
how severely you are jostled by the resulting water wave as it passes, the result will look something
like that shown on the far right of figure 4.7. locations of significant jostling are where wave peaks
(or troughs) from each slit coincide. regions of minimal or no jostling are where peaks from one slit
coincide with troughs from the other, resulting in a cancellation.

figure 4.7 circular water waves that emerge from each slit overlap with each other, causing the total
wave to be increased at some locations and decreased at others.

since the photographic plate records how much it is "jostled" by the incoming light, exactly the
same reasoning applied to the wave picture of a light beam tells us that when both slits are open the
photograph will look like that in figure 4.8. the brightest areas in figure 4.8 are where light-wave
peaks (or troughs) from each slit coincide. dark areas are where wave peaks from one slit coincide
with wave troughs from the other, resulting in a cancellation. the sequence of light and dark bands is
known as an interference pattern. this photograph is significantly different from that shown in figure
4.6,  and  hence  there  is  a  concrete  experiment  to  distinguish  between  the  particle  and  the  wave
pictures of light. young carried out a version of this experiment and his results matched figure 4.8,
thereby confirming the wave picture. newton's corpuscular view was defeated (although it took quite
some time before physicists accepted this). the prevailing wave view of light was subsequently put
on a mathematically firm foundation by maxwell.

figure 4.8 if light is a wave, then when both slits are open there will be interference between the
portions of the wave emerging from each slit.

but einstein, the man who brought down newton's revered theory of gravity, seems now to have
resurrected newton's particle model of light by his introduction of photons. of course, we still face
the  same  question:  how  can  a  particle  perspective  account  for  the  interference  pattern  shown  in
figure  4.8?  at  first  blush  you  might  make  the  following  suggestion.  water  is  composed  of  h 2o
molecules—the "particles" of water. nevertheless, when a lot of these molecules stream along with
one another they can produce water waves, with the attendant interference properties illustrated in
figure  4.7. and  so,  it  might  seem  reasonable  to  guess  that  wave  properties,  such  as  interference
patterns, can arise from a particle picture of light provided a huge number of photons, the particles of
light, are involved.

in  reality,  though,  the  microscopic  world  is  far  more  subtle.  even  if  the  intensity  of  the  light
source in figure 4.8 is turned down and down, finally to the point where individual photons are being
fired one by one at the barrier—say at the rate of one every ten seconds—the resulting photographic
plate will still look like that in figure 4.8: so long as we wait long enough for a huge number of these
separate bundles of light to make it through the slits and to each be recorded by a single dot where
they hit the photographic plate, these dots will build up to form the image of an interference pattern,
the  image  in  figure  4.8.  this  is  astounding.  how  can individual photon particles that sequentially
pass through the screen and separately hit the photographic plate conspire to produce the bright and
dark bands of interfering waves? conventional reasoning tells us that each and every photon passes
through either the left slit or the right slit and we would therefore expect to find the pattern shown in
figure 4.6. but we don't.

if you are not bowled over by this fact of nature, it means that either you have seen it before and
have become blase or the description so far has not been sufficiently vivid. so, in case it's the latter,
let's describe it again, but in a slightly different way. you close off the left slit and fire the photons
one  by  one  at  the  barrier.  some  get  through,  some  don't.  the  ones  that  do  create  an  image  on  the
photographic plate, dot by single dot, which looks like that in figure 4.4. you then run the experiment
again with a new photographic plate, but this time you open both slits. naturally enough, you think that
this  will  only  increase  the  number  of  photons  that  pass  through  the  slits  in  the  barrier  and  hit  the
photographic  plate,  thereby  exposing  the  film  to  more  total  light  than  in  your  first  run  of  the
experiment. but when you later examine the image produced, you find that not only are there places on
the photographic plate that were dark in the first experiment and are now bright, as expected, there
are also places on the photographic plate that were bright in your first experiment but are now dark,
as in figure 4.8. by increasing the number of individual photons that hit the photographic plate you
ha v e decreased  the  brightness  in  certain  areas.  somehow,  temporally  separated,  individual
particulate  photons  are  able  to  cancel  each  other  out.  think  about  how  crazy  this  is:  photons  that
would have passed through the right slit and hit the film in one of the dark bands in figure 4.8 fail to
do so when the left slit is opened (which is why the band is now dark). but how in the world can a
tiny bundle of light that passes through one slit be at all affected by whether or not the other slit is
open? as feynman noted, it's as strange as if you fire a machine gun at the screen, and when both slits
are open, independent, separately fired bullets somehow cancel one another out, leaving a pattern of
unscathed positions on the target—positions that are hit when only one slit in the barrier is open.

such  experiments  show  that  einstein's  particles  of  light  are  quite  different  from  newton's.
somehow photons—although they are particles—embody wave-like features of light as well. the fact
that the energy of these particles is determined by a wave-like feature—frequency—is the first clue
that a strange union is occurring. but the photoelectric effect and the double-slit experiment really
bring the lesson home. the photoelectric effect shows that light has particle properties. the double-
slit experiment shows that light manifests the interference properties of waves. together they show
that light has both wave-like and particle-like properties. the microscopic world demands that we
shed our intuition that something is either a wave or a particle and embrace the possibility that it is
both. it is here that feynman's pronouncement that "nobody understands quantum mechanics" comes to
the fore. we can utter words such as "wave-particle duality." we can translate these words into a
mathematical  formalism  that  describes  real-world  experiments  with  amazing  accuracy.  but  it  is
extremely hard to understand at a deep, intuitive level this dazzling feature of the microscopic world.

matter particles are also waves

in the first few decades of the twentieth century, many of the greatest theoretical physicists grappled
tirelessly to develop a mathematically sound and physically sensible understanding of these hitherto
hidden  microscopic  features  of  reality.  under  the  leadership  of  niels  bohr  in  copenhagen,  for
example, substantial progress was made in explaining the properties of light emitted by glowing-hot
hydrogen  atoms.  but  this  and  other  work  prior  to  the  mid-1920s  was  more  a  makeshift  union  of
nineteenth-century  ideas  with  newfound  quantum  concepts  than  a  coherent  framework  for
understanding the physical universe. compared with the clear, logical framework of newton's laws
of  motion  or  maxwell's  electromagnetic  theory,  the  partially  developed  quantum  theory  was  in  a
chaotic state.

in  1923,  the  young  french  nobleman  prince  louis  de  broglie  added  a  new  element  to  the
quantum fray, one that would shortly help to usher in the mathematical framework of modern quantum
mechanics  and  that  earned  him  the  1929  nobel  prize  in  physics.  inspired  by  a  chain  of  reasoning
rooted in einstein's special relativity, de broglie suggested that the wave-particle duality applied not
only to light but to matter as well. he reasoned, roughly speaking, that einstein's e = mc2 relates mass
to energy, that planck and einstein had related energy to the frequency of waves, and therefore, by
combining  the  two,  mass  should  have  a  wave-like  incarnation  as  well.  after  carefully  working
through this line of thought, he suggested that just as light is a wave phenomenon that quantum theory
shows  to  have  an  equally  valid  particle  description,  an  electron—which  we  normally  think  of  as
being a particle—might have an equally valid description in terms of waves. einstein immediately
took to de broglie's idea, as it was a natural outgrowth of his own contributions of relativity and of
photons. even so, nothing is a substitute for experimental proof. such proof was soon to come from
the work of clinton davisson and lester germer.

in the mid-1920s, davisson and germer, experimental physicists at the bell telephone company,
were studying how a beam of electrons bounces off of a chunk of nickel. the only detail that matters
for  us  is  that  the  nickel  crystals  in  such  an  experiment  act  very  much  like  the  two  slits  in  the
experiment illustrated by the figures of the last section—in fact, it's perfectly okay to think of this
experiment as being the same one illustrated there, except that a beam of electrons is used in place of
a beam of light. we will adopt this point of view. when davisson and germer examined electrons
making it through the two slits in the barrier by allowing them to hit a phosphorescent screen that
recorded the location of impact of each electron by a bright dot—essentially what happens inside a
television—they found something remarkable. a pattern very much akin to that of figure 4.8 emerged.
their experiment therefore showed that electrons exhibit interference phenomena, the telltale sign of
waves. at dark spots on the phosphorescent screen, electrons were somehow "canceling each other
out" just like the overlapping peak and trough of water waves. even if the beam of fired electrons
was "thinned" so that, for instance, only one electron was emitted every ten seconds, the individual
electrons  still  built  up  the  bright  and  dark  bands—one  spot  at  a  time.  somehow,  as  with  photons,
individual  electrons  "interfere"  with  themselves  in  the  sense  that  individual  electrons,  over  time,
reconstruct the interference pattern associated with waves. we are inescapably forced to conclude
that each electron embodies a wave-like character in conjunction with its more familiar depiction as
a particle.

although  we  have  described  this  in  the  case  of  electrons,  similar  experiments  lead  to  the
conclusion  that all  matter  has  a  wave-like  character.  but  how  does  this  jibe  with  our  real-world
experience of matter as being solid and sturdy, and in no way wave-like? well, de broglie set down
a formula for the wavelength of matter waves, and it shows that the wavelength is proportional to
planck's  constant h.  (more  precisely,  the  wavelength  is  given  by h divided by the material body's
momentum.)  since h is so small, the resulting wavelengths are similarly minuscule compared with
everyday scales. this is why the wave-like character of matter becomes directly apparent only upon
careful microscopic investigation. just as the large value of c, the speed of light, obscures much of the
true nature of space and time, the smallness of h obscures the wave-like aspects of matter in the day-
to-day world.

waves of what?

the interference phenomenon found by davisson and germer made the wave-like nature of electrons
tangibly  evident.  but  waves  of what?  one  early  suggestion  made  by  austrian  physicist  erwin
schrödinger was that the waves were "smeared-out" electrons. this captured some of the "feeling" of
an electron wave, but it was too rough. when you smear something out, part of it is here and part of it
is there. however, one never encounters half of an electron or a third of an electron or any other
fraction,  for  that  matter.  this  makes  it  hard  to  grasp  what  a  smeared  electron  actually  is. as  an
alternative, in 1926 german physicist max born sharply refined schrödinger's interpretation of an
electron wave, and it is his interpretation—amplified by bohr and his colleagues—that is still with us
today.  born's  suggestion  is  one  of  the  strangest  features  of  quantum  theory,  but  is  supported
nonetheless by an enormous amount of experimental data. he asserted that an electron wave must be
interpreted from the standpoint of probability. places where the magnitude (a bit more correctly, the
square of magnitude) of the wave is large are places where the electron is more likely to be found;
places  where  the  magnitude  is small  are  places  where  the  electron  is less  likely  to  be  found. an
example is illustrated in figure 4.9.

this  is  truly  a  peculiar  idea.  what  business  does  probability  have  in  the  formulation  of
fundamental physics? we are accustomed to probability showing up in horse races, in coin tosses,
and at the roulette table, but in those cases it merely reflects our incomplete knowledge. if we knew
precisely the speed of the roulette wheel, the weight and hardness of the white marble, the location
and  speed  of  the  marble  when  it  drops  to  the  wheel,  the  exact  specifications  of  the  material
constituting the cubicles and so on, and if we made use of sufficiently powerful computers to carry out
our calculations we would, according to classical physics, be able to predict with certainty where the
marble would settle. gambling casinos rely on your inability to ascertain all of this information and
to do the necessary calculations prior to placing your bet. but we see that probability as encountered
at the roulette table does not reflect anything particularly fundamental about how the world works.
quantum  mechanics,  on  the  contrary,  injects  the  concept  of  probability  into  the  universe  at  a  far
deeper level. according to born and more than half a century of subsequent experiments, the wave
nature of matter implies that matter itself must be described fundamentally in a probabilistic manner.
for  macroscopic  objects  like  a  coffee  cup  or  the  roulette  wheel,  de  broglie's  rule  shows  that  the
wave-like character is virtually unnoticeable and for most ordinary purposes the associated quantum-
mechanical probability can be completely ignored. but at a microscopic level we learn that the best
we  can  ever  do  is  say  that  an  electron  has  a  particular  probability  of  being  found  at  any  given
location.

figure 4.9 the wave associated with an electron is largest where the electron is most likely to be
found, and progressively smaller at locations where it is less likely to be found.

the probabilistic interpretation has the virtue that if an electron wave does what other waves
can do—for instance, slam into some obstacle and develop all sorts of distinct ripples—it does not
mean that the electron itself has shattered into separate pieces. rather, it means that there are now a
number of locations where the electron might be found with a nonnegligible probability. in practice
this means that if a particular experiment involving an electron is repeated over and over again in an
absolutely identical manner, the same answer for, say, the measured position of an electron will  not
be found over and over again. rather, the subsequent repeats of the experiment will yield a variety of
different results with the property that the number of times the electron is found at any given location
is governed by the shape of the electron's probability wave. if the probability wave (more precisely,
the square of the probability wave) is twice as large at location a than at location b, then the theory
predicts that in a sequence of many repeats of the experiment the electron will be found at location a
twice as often as at location b. exact outcomes of experiments cannot be predicted; the best we can
do is predict the probability that any given outcome may occur.

even so, as long as we can determine mathematically the precise form of probability waves,
their probabilistic predictions can be tested by repeating a given experiment numerous times, thereby
experimentally measuring the likelihood of getting one particular result or another. just a few months
after de broglie's suggestion, schrödinger took the decisive step toward this end by determining an
equation that governs the shape and the evolution of probability waves, or as they came to be known,
wave  functions.  it  was  not  long  before  schrödinger's  equation  and  the  probabilistic  interpretation
were being used to make wonderfully accurate predictions. by 1927, therefore, classical innocence
had been lost. gone were the days of a clockwork universe whose individual constituents were set in
motion at some moment in the past and obediently fulfilled their inescapable, uniquely determined
destiny. according to quantum mechanics, the universe evolves according to a rigorous and precise
mathematical formalism, but this framework determines only the probability that any particular future
will happen—not which future actually ensues.

many find this conclusion troubling or even downright unacceptable. einstein was one. in one of
physics' most time-honored utterances, einstein admonished the quantum stalwarts that "god does not
play dice with the universe." he felt that probability was turning up in fundamental physics because
of a subtle version of the reason it turns up at the roulette wheel: some basic incompleteness in our
understanding.  the  universe,  in  einstein's  view,  had  no  room  for  a  future  whose  precise  form
involves  an  element  of  chance.  physics  should  predict how  the  universe  evolves,  not  merely  the
likelihood that any particular evolution might occur. but experiment after experiment—some of the
most  convincing  ones  being  carried  out  after  his  death—convincingly  confirm  that  einstein  was
wrong. as  the  british  theoretical  physicist  stephen  hawking  has  said,  on  this  point  "einstein  was
confused, not the quantum theory."6

nevertheless,  the  debate  about  what  quantum  mechanics  really  means  continues  unabated.
everyone agrees on how to use the equations of quantum theory to make accurate predictions. but
there  is  no  consensus  on  what  it  really  means  to  have  probability  waves,  nor  on  how  a  particle
"chooses" which of its many possible futures to follow, nor even on whether it really does choose or
instead splits off like a branching tributary to live out all possible futures in an ever-expanding arena
of parallel universes. these interpretational issues are worthy of a book-length discussion in their
own right, and, in fact, there are many excellent books that espouse one or another way of thinking
about  quantum  theory.  but  what  appears  certain  is  that  no  matter  how  you  interpret  quantum
mechanics, it undeniably shows that the universe is founded on principles that, from the standpoint of
our day-to-day experiences, are bizarre.

the  meta-lesson  of  both  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics  is  that  when  we  deeply  probe  the
fundamental workings of the universe we may come upon aspects that are vastly different from our
expectations. the boldness of asking deep questions may require unforeseen flexibility if we are to
accept the answers.

feynman's perspective

richard feynman was one of the greatest theoretical physicists since einstein. he fully accepted the
probabilistic  core  of  quantum  mechanics,  but  in  the  years  following  world  war  ii  he  offered  a
powerful  new  way  of  thinking  about  the  theory.  from  the  standpoint  of  numerical  predictions,
feynman's perspective agrees exactly with all that went before. but its formulation is quite different.
let's describe it in the context of the electron two-slit experiment.

the troubling thing about figure 4.8 is that we envision each electron as passing through either
the left slit or the right slit and therefore we expect the union of figures 4.4 and 4.5, as in figure 4.6,
to represent the resulting data accurately. an electron that passes through the right slit should not care
that there also happens to be a left slit, and vice versa. but somehow it does. the interference pattern
generated  requires  an  overlapping  and  an  intermingling  between something  sensitive  to  both  slits,
even if we fire electrons one by one. schrödinger, de broglie, and born explained this phenomenon
by associating a probability wave to each electron. like the water waves in figure 4.7, the electron's
probability wave "sees" both slits and is subject to the same kind of interference from intermingling.
places where the probability wave is augmented by the intermingling, like the places of significant
jostling  in  figure  4.7,  are  locations  where  the  electron  is  likely  to  be  found;  places  where  the
probability  wave  is  diminished  by  the  intermingling,  like  the  places  of  minimal  or  no  jostling  in
figure  4.7,  are  locations  where  the  electron  is  unlikely  or  never  to  be  found.  electrons  hit  the
phosphorescent screen one by one, distributed according to this probability profile, and thereby build
up an interference pattern like that in figure 4.8.

feynman took a different tack. he challenged the basic classical assumption that each electron
either goes through the left slit or the right slit. you might think this to be such a basic property of how
things work that challenging it is fatuous. after all, can't you look in the region between the slits and
the phosphorescent screen to determine through which slit each electron passes? you can. but now
you have changed the experiment. to see the electron you must do something to it—for instance, you
can shine light on it, that is, bounce photons off it. now, on everyday scales photons act as negligible
little  probes  that  bounce  off  trees,  paintings,  and  people  with  essentially  no  effect  on  the  state  of
motion  of  these  comparatively  large  material  bodies.  but  electrons  are  little  wisps  of  matter.
regardless  of  how  gingerly  you  carry  out  your  determination  of  the  slit  through  which  it  passed,
photons  that  bounce  off  the  electron  necessarily  affect  its  subsequent  motion.  and  this  change  in
motion changes the results of our experiment. if you disturb the experiment just enough to determine
the  slit  through  which  each  electron  passes,  experiments  show  that  the  results  change  from  that  of
figure  4.8  and  become  like  that  of  figure  4.6!  the  quantum  world  ensures  that  once  it  has  been
established  that  each  electron  has  gone  through  either  the  left  slit  or  the  right  slit,  the  interference
between the two slits disappears.

and so feynman was justified in leveling his challenge since—although our experience in the
world seems to require that each electron pass through one or the other of the slits—by the late 1920s
physicists  realized  that  any  attempt  to  verify  this  seemingly  basic  quality  of  reality  ruins  the

experiment.

feynman  proclaimed  that  each  electron  that  makes  it  through  to  the  phosphorescent  screen
actually goes through both slits. it sounds crazy, but hang on: things get even more wild. feynman
argued that in traveling from the source to a given point on the phosphorescent screen each individual
electron  actually  traverses every possible  trajectory  simultaneously;  a  few  of  the  trajectories  are
illustrated in figure 4.10. it goes in a nice orderly way through the left slit. it simultaneously also
goes in a nice orderly way through the right slit. it heads toward the left slit, but suddenly changes
course and heads through the right. it meanders back and forth, finally passing through the left slit. it
goes on a long journey to the andromeda galaxy before turning back and passing through the left slit
on its way to the screen. and on and on it goes—the electron, according to feynman, simultaneously
"sniffs" out every possible path connecting its starting location with its final destination.

figure 4.10 according to feynman's formulation of quantum mechanics, particles must be viewed as
travelling  from  one  location  to  another  along  every  possible  path.  here,  a  few  of  the  infinity  of
trajectories for a single electron travelling from the source to the phosphorescent screen are shown.
notice that this one electron actually goes through both slits.

feynman showed that he could assign a number to each of these paths in such a way that their
combined  average  yields  exactly  the  same  result  for  the  probability  calculated  using  the  wave-
function approach. and so from feynman's perspective no probability wave needs to be associated
with the electron. instead, we have to imagine something equally if not more bizarre. the probability
that the electron—always viewed as a particle through and through—arrives at any chosen point on
the screen is built up from the combined effect of every possible way of getting there. this is known
as feynman's "sum-over-paths" approach to quantum mechanics.7

at this point your  classical  upbringing  is  balking:  how  can  one  electron simultaneously  take
different paths—and no less than an infinite number of them? this seems like a defensible objection,
but quantum mechanics—the physics of our world—requires that you hold such pedestrian complaints
in  abeyance.  the  result  of  calculations  using  feynman's  approach  agree  with  those  of  the  wave
function method, which agree with experiments. you must allow nature to dictate what is and what is
not  sensible. as  feynman  once  wrote,  "[quantum  mechanics]  describes  nature  as  absurd  from  the
point of view of common sense. and it fully agrees with experiment. so i hope you can accept nature
as she is—absurd."8

but no matter how absurd nature is when examined on microscopic scales, things must conspire
so that we recover the familiar prosaic happenings of the world experienced on everyday scales. to
this end, feynman showed that if you examine the motion of large objects—like baseballs, airplanes,
or planets, all large in comparison with subatomic particles—his rule for assigning numbers to each

path ensures that all paths but one cancel each other out when their contributions are combined. in
effect, only one of the infinity of paths matters as far as the motion of the object is concerned. and this
trajectory is precisely the one emerging from newton's laws of motion. this is why in the everyday
world  it seems  to  us  that  objects—like  a  ball  tossed  in  the  air—follow  a  single,  unique,  and
predictable trajectory from their origin to their destination. but for microscopic objects, feynman's
rule for assigning numbers to paths shows that many different paths can and often do contribute to an
object's motion. in the double-slit experiment, for example, some of these paths pass through different
slits, giving rise to the interference pattern observed. in the microscopic realm we therefore cannot
assert  that  an  electron  passes  through  only  one  slit  or  the  other.  the  interference  pattern  and
feynman's alternative formulation of quantum mechanics emphatically attest to the contrary.

just as we may find that varying interpretations of a book or a film can be more or less helpful in
aiding our understanding of different aspects of the work, the same is true of the different approaches
to  quantum  mechanics.  although  their  predictions  always  agree  completely,  the  wave  function
approach  and  feynman's  sum-over-paths  approach  give  us  different  ways  of  thinking  about  what's
going on. as we shall see later on, for some applications, one or the other approach can provide an
invaluable explanatory framework.

quantum weirdness

by now you should have some sense of the dramatically new way that the universe works according
to quantum mechanics. if you have not as yet fallen victim to bohr's dizziness dictum, the quantum
weirdness we now discuss should at least make you feel a bit lightheaded.

even  more  so  than  with  the  theories  of  relativity,  it  is  hard  to  embrace  quantum  mechanics
viscerally—to  think  like  a  miniature  person  born  and  raised  in  the  microscopic  realm.  there  is,
though, one aspect of the theory that can act as a guidepost for your intuition, as it is the hallmark
feature  that  fundamentally  differentiates  quantum  from  classical  reasoning.  it  is  the uncertainty
principle, discovered by the german physicist werner heisenberg in 1927.

this principle grows out of an objection that may have occurred to you earlier. we noted that the
act of determining the slit through which each electron passes (its position) necessarily disturbs its
subsequent motion (its velocity). but just as we can assure ourselves of someone's presence either by
gently touching them or by giving them an overzealous slap on the back, why can't we determine the
electron's position with an "ever gentler" light source in order to have an ever decreasing impact on
its motion? from the standpoint of nineteenth-century physics we can. by using an ever dimmer lamp
(and an ever more sensitive light detector) we can have a vanishingly small impact on the electron's
motion.  but  quantum  mechanics  itself  illuminates  a  flaw  in  this  reasoning.  as  we  turn  down  the
intensity of the light source we now know that we are decreasing the number of photons it emits. once
we  get  down  to  emitting  individual  photons  we  cannot  dim  the  light  any  further  without  actually
turning it off. there is a fundamental quantum-mechanical limit to the "gentleness" of our probe. and
hence,  there  is  always  a  minimal  disruption  that  we  cause  to  the  electron's  velocity  through  our
measurement of its position.

well,  that's  almost  correct.  planck's  law  tells  us  that  the  energy  of  a  single  photon  is
proportional to its frequency (inversely proportional to its wavelength). by using light of lower and
lower  frequency  (larger  and  larger  wavelength)  we  can  therefore  produce  ever  gentler  individual
photons. but here's the catch. when we bounce a wave off of an object, the information we receive is

only  enough  to  determine  the  object's  position  to  within  a margin  of  error  equal  to  the  wave's
wavelength. to get an intuitive feel for this important fact, imagine trying to pinpoint the location of a
large, slightly submerged rock by the way it affects passing ocean waves. as the waves approach the
rock,  they  form  a  nice  orderly  train  of  one  up  and-down  wave  cycle  followed  by  another. after
passing  by  the  rock,  the  individual  wave  cycles  are  distorted—the  telltale  sign  of  the  submerged
rock's presence. but like the finest set of tick marks on a ruler, the individual up-and-down wave
cycles are the finest units making up the wave-train, and therefore by examining solely how they are
disrupted we can determine the rock's location only to within a margin of error equal to the length of
the  wave  cycles,  that  is,  the  wave's  wavelength.  in  the  case  of  light,  the  constituent  photons  are,
roughly speaking, the individual wave cycles (with the height of the wave cycles being determined by
the number of photons); a photon, therefore, can be used to pinpoint an object's location only to within
a precision of one wavelength.

and so we are faced with a quantum-mechanical balancing act. if we use high-frequency (short
wavelength) light we can locate an electron with greater precision. but high-frequency photons are
very energetic and therefore sharply disturb the electron's velocity. if we use low-frequency (long
wavelength) light we minimize the impact on the electron's motion, since the constituent photons have
comparatively  low  energy,  but  we  sacrifice  precision  in  determining  the  electron's  position.
heisenberg quantified this competition and found a mathematical relationship between the precision
with  which  one  measures  the  electron's  position  and  the  precision  with  which  one  measures  its
velocity.  he  found—in  line  with  our  discussion—that  each  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  other:
greater  precision  in  a  position  measurement  necessarily  entails  greater  imprecision  in  a  velocity
measurement, and vice versa. and of utmost importance, although we have tied our discussion to one
particular  means  for  determining  the  electron's  whereabouts,  heisenberg  showed  that  the  trade-off
between  the  precision  of  position  and  velocity  measurements  is  a  fundamental  fact  that  holds  true
regardless  of  the  equipment  used  or  the  procedure  employed.  unlike  the  framework  of  newton  or
even of einstein, in which the motion of a particle is described by giving its location and its velocity,
quantum  mechanics  shows  that  at  a  microscopic  level you  cannot  possibly  know  both  of  these
features with total precision. moreover, the more precisely you know one, the less precisely you
know the other. and although we have described this for electrons, the ideas directly apply to all
constituents of nature.

einstein tried to minimize this departure from classical physics by arguing that although quantum
reasoning  certainly  does  appear  to  limit  one's knowledge of the position and velocity, the electron
still has a definite position and velocity exactly as we have always thought. but during the last couple
of decades theoretical progress spearheaded by the late irish physicist john bell and the experimental
results  of alain aspect  and  his  collaborators  have  shown  convincingly  that  einstein  was  wrong.
electrons—and everything else for that matter—cannot be described as simultaneously being at such-
and-such  location and  having  such-and-such  speed.  quantum  mechanics  shows  that  not  only  could
such a statement never be experimentally verified—as explained above—but it directly contradicts
other, more recently established experimental results.

in fact, if you were to capture a single electron in a big, solid box and then slowly crush the
sides to pinpoint its position with ever greater precision, you would find the electron getting more
and  more  frantic.  almost  as  if  it  were  overcome  with  claustrophobia,  the  electron  will  go
increasingly  haywire—bouncing  off  of  the  walls  of  the  box  with  increasingly  frenetic  and
unpredictable speed. nature does not allow its constituents to be cornered. in the h-bar, where we
imagine h to be much larger than in the real world, thereby making everyday objects directly subject

to quantum effects, the ice cubes in george's and gracie's drinks frantically rattle around as they too
suffer  from  quantum  claustrophobia. although  the  h-bar  is  a  fantasyland—in  reality, h  is  terribly
small—precisely this kind of quantum claustrophobia is a pervasive feature of the microscopic realm.
the  motion  of  microscopic  particles  becomes  increasingly  wild  when  they  are  examined  and
confined to ever smaller regions of space.

the uncertainty principle also gives rise to a striking effect known as quantum tunneling. if you
fire  a  plastic  pellet  against  a  ten-foot-thick  concrete  wall,  classical  physics  confirms  what  your
instincts tell you will happen: the pellet will bounce back at you. the reason is that the pellet simply
does not have enough energy to penetrate such a formidable obstacle. but at the level of fundamental
particles, quantum mechanics shows unequivocally that the wave functions—that is, the probability
waves—of the particles making up the pellet all have a tiny piece that spills out through the wall.
this means that there is a small—but not zero—chance that the pellet actually can penetrate the wall
and emerge on the other side. how can this be? the reason comes down, once again, to heisenberg's
uncertainty principle.

the mathematics of quantum mechanics shows that the greater the energy barrier, the lower the
probability  that  this  creative  microscopic  accounting  will  actually  occur.  but  for  microscopic
particles  facing  a  concrete  slab,  they  can  and  sometimes  do  borrow  enough  energy  to  do  what  is
impossible  from  the  standpoint  of  classical  physics—momentarily  penetrate  and  tunnel  through  a
region  that  they  do  not  initially  have  enough  energy  to  enter.  as  the  objects  we  study  become
increasingly complicated, consisting of more and more particle constituents, such quantum tunneling
can still occur, but it becomes very unlikely since all of the individual particles must be lucky enough
to tunnel together. but the shocking episodes of george's disappearing cigar, of an ice cube passing
right through the wall of a glass, and of george and gracie's passing right through a wall of the bar,
can happen. in a fantasyland such as the h-bar, in which we imagine that h is large, such quantum

to see this, imagine that you are completely destitute and suddenly learn that a distant relative
has passed on in a far-off land, leaving you a tremendous fortune to claim. the only problem is that
you don't have the money to buy a plane ticket to get there. you explain the situation to your friends: if
only they will allow you to surmount the barrier between you and your new fortune by temporarily
lending you the money for a ticket, you can pay them back handsomely after your return. but no one
has the money to lend. you remember, though, that an old friend of yours works for an airline and you
implore him with the same request. again, he cannot afford to lend you the money but he does offer a
solution. the accounting system of the airline is such that if you wire the ticket payment within 24
hours of arrival at your destination, no one will ever know that it was not paid for prior to departure.
in this way you are able to claim your inheritance.

the accounting procedures of quantum mechanics are quite similar. just as heisenberg showed
that  there  is  a  trade-off  between  the  precision  of  measurements  of  position  and  velocity,  he  also
showed that there is a similar trade-off in the precision of energy  measurements  and how long one
takes  to  do  the  measurement.  quantum  mechanics  asserts  that  you  can't  say  that  a  particle  has
precisely such-and-such energy at precisely such-and-such moment in time. ever increasing precision
of energy measurements require ever longer durations to carry them out. roughly speaking, this means
that the energy a particle has can wildly fluctuate so long as this fluctuation is over a short enough
time scale. so, just as the accounting system of the airline "allows" you to "borrow" the money for a
plane  ticket  provided  you  pay  it  back  quickly  enough,  quantum  mechanics  allows  a  particle  to
"borrow"  energy  so  long  as  it  can  relinquish  it  within  a  time  frame  determined  by  heisenberg's
uncertainty principle.

tunneling is commonplace. but the probability rules of quantum mechanics—and, in particular, the
actual smallness of h in the real world—show that if you walked into a solid wall every second, you
would  have  to  wait  longer  than  the  current  age  of  the  universe  to  have  a  good  chance  of  passing
through it on one of your attempts. with eternal patience (and longevity), though, you could—sooner
or later—emerge on the other side.

the uncertainty principle captures the heart of quantum mechanics. features that we normally
think of as being so basic as to be beyond question—that objects have definite positions and speeds
and that they have definite energies at definite moments—are now seen as mere artifacts of planck's
constant being so tiny on the scales of the everyday world. of prime importance is that when this
quantum realization is applied to the fabric of spacetime, it shows fatal imperfections in the "stitches
of gravity" and leads us to the third and primary conflict physics has faced during the past century.

chapter 5

the need for a new theory: general relativity vs. quantum

mechanics

our  understanding  of  the  physical  universe  has  deepened  profoundly  during  the  past  century.  the
theoretical  tools  of  quantum  mechanics  and  general  relativity  allow  us  to  understand  and  make
testable  predictions  about  physical  happenings  from  the  atomic  and  subatomic  realms  all  the  way
through  phenomena  occurring  on  the  scales  of  galaxies,  clusters  of  galaxies,  and  beyond  to  the
structure  of  the  whole  universe  itself.  this  is  a  monumental  achievement.  it  is  truly  inspiring  that
beings confined to one planet orbiting a run-of-the-mill star in the far edges of a fairly ordinary galaxy
have  been  able,  through  thought  and  experiment,  to  ascertain  and  comprehend  some  of  the  most
mysterious characteristics of the physical universe. nevertheless, physicists by their nature will not
be satisfied until they feel that the deepest and most fundamental understanding of the universe has
been unveiled. this is what stephen hawking has alluded to as a first step toward knowing "the mind
of god."1

there  is  ample  evidence  that  quantum  mechanics  and  general  relativity  do  not  provide  this
deepest  level  of  understanding.  since  their  usual  domains  of  applicability  are  so  different,  most
situations  require  the  use  of  quantum  mechanics or  general  relativity,  but  not  both.  under  certain
extreme conditions, however, where things are very massive and very small—near the central point
of  black  holes  or  the  whole  universe  at  the  moment  of  the  big  bang,  to  name  two  examples—we
require both general relativity and quantum mechanics for proper understanding. but like the mixing
of fire and gunpowder, when we try to combine quantum mechanics and general relativity, their union
brings violent catastrophe. well-formulated physical problems elicit nonsensical answers when the
equations of both these theories are commingled. the nonsense often takes the form of a prediction
that  the  quantum-mechanical  probability  for  some  process  is  not  20  percent  or  73  percent  or  91
percent but infinity. what in the world does a probability greater than one mean, let alone one that is
infinite? we are forced to conclude that there is something seriously wrong. by closely examining the
basic properties of general relativity and quantum mechanics, we can identify what that something is.

the heart of quantum mechanics

when  heisenberg  discovered  the  uncertainty  principle,  physics  turned  a  sharp  corner,  never  to
retrace  its  steps.  probabilities,  wave  functions,  interference,  and  quanta  all  involve  radically  new
ways of seeing reality. nevertheless, a die-hard "classical" physicist might still have hung on to a
thread of hope that when all was said and done these departures would add up to a framework not too
distant from old ways of thinking. but the uncertainty principle cleanly and definitively undercut any
attempt to cling to the past.

the uncertainty principle tells us that the universe is a frenetic place when examined on smaller

and  smaller  distances  and  shorter  and  shorter  time  scales.  we  saw  some  evidence  of  this  in  our
attempt, described in the preceding chapter, to pinpoint the location of elementary particles such as
electrons: by shining light of ever higher frequency on electrons, we measure their position with ever
greater precision, but at a cost, since our observations become ever more disruptive. high-frequency
photons have a lot of energy and therefore give the electrons a sharp "kick," significantly changing
their velocities. like the frenzy in a room full of children all of whose momentary positions you know
with great accuracy but over whose velocities—the speeds and directions in which they are moving
—you have almost no control, this inability to know both the positions and velocities of elementary
particles implies that the microscopic realm is intrinsically turbulent.

although this example conveys the basic relationship between uncertainty and frenzy, it actually
reveals only part of the story. it might lead you to think, for instance, that uncertainty arises only when
we clumsy observers of nature stumble onto the scene. this is not true. the example of an electron
violently  reacting  to  being  confined  in  a  small  box  by  rattling  around  at  high  speed  takes  us  a  bit
closer to the truth. even without "direct hits" from an experimenter's disruptive photon, the electron's
velocity severely and unpredictably changes from one moment to the next. but even this example does
not fully reveal the stunning microscopic features of nature entailed by heisenberg's discovery. even
in the most quiescent setting imaginable, such as an empty region of space, the uncertainty principle
tells  us  that  from  a  microscopic  vantage  point  there  is  a  tremendous  amount  of  activity. and  this
activity gets increasingly agitated on ever smaller distance and time scales.

quantum accounting is essential to understand this. we saw in the preceding chapter that just as
you might temporarily borrow money to overcome an important financial obstacle, a particle such as
an electron can temporarily borrow energy to overcome a literal physical barrier. this is true. but
quantum mechanics forces us to take the analogy one important step further. imagine someone who is
a  compulsive  borrower  and  goes  from  friend  to  friend  asking  for  money.  the  shorter  the  time  for
which  a  friend  can  lend  him  money,  the  larger  the  loan  he  seeks.  borrow  and  return,  borrow  and
return—over and over again with unflagging intensity he takes in money only to give it back in short
order.  like  stock  prices  on  a  wild,  roller-coaster  day  on  wall  street,  the  amount  of  money  the
compulsive borrower possesses at any given moment goes through extreme fluctuations, but when all
is said and done, an accounting of his finances shows that he is no better off than when he began.

heisenberg's uncertainty principle asserts that a similar frantic shifting back and forth of energy
and momentum is occurring perpetually in the universe on microscopic distance and time intervals.
even in an empty region of space—inside an empty box, for example—the uncertainty principle says
that the energy and momentum are uncertain: they fluctuate between extremes that get larger as the
size of the box and the time scale over which it is examined get smaller and smaller. it's as if the
region  of  space  inside  the  box  is  a  compulsive  "borrower"  of  energy  and  momentum,  constantly
extracting "loans" from the universe and subsequently "paying" them back. but what participates in
these  exchanges  in,  for  instance,  a  quiet empty region of space? everything. literally. energy (and
momentum as well) is the ultimate convertible currency. e  = mc2 tells us that energy can be turned
into matter and vice versa. thus if an energy fluctuation is big enough it can momentarily cause, for
instance,  an  electron  and  its  antimatter  companion  the  positron  to  erupt  into  existence,  even  if  the
region was initially empty! since this energy must be quickly repaid, these particles will annihilate
one another after an instant, relinquishing the energy borrowed in their creation. and the same is true
for  all  of  the  other  forms  that  energy  and  momentum  can  take—other  particle  eruptions  and
annihilations,  wild  electromagnetic-field  oscillations,  weak  and  strong  force-field  fluctuations—
quantum-mechanical  uncertainty  tells  us  the  universe  is  a  teeming,  chaotic,  frenzied  arena  on

microscopic  scales. as  feynman  once  jested,  "created  and  annihilated,  created  and  annihilated—
what a waste of time."2 since the borrowing and repaying on average cancel each other out, an empty
region  of  space  looks  calm  and  placid  when  examined  with  all  but  microscopic  precision.  the
uncertainty principle, however, reveals that macroscopic averaging obscures a wealth of microscopic
activity.3 as we will see shortly, this frenzy is the obstacle to merging general relativity and quantum
mechanics.

quantum field theory

over  the  course  of  the  1930s  and  1940s  theoretical  physicists,  led  by  the  likes  of  paul  dirac,
wolfgang pauli, julian schwinger, freeman dyson, sin-itiro tomonaga, and feynman, to name a few,
struggled  relentlessly  to  find  a  mathematical  formalism  capable  of  dealing  with  this  microscopic
obstreperousness.  they  found  that  schrödinger's  quantum  wave  equation  (mentioned  in  chapter  4)
was actually only an approximate description of microscopic physics—an approximation that works
extremely  well  when  one  does  not  probe  too  deeply  into  the  microscopic  frenzy  (either
experimentally or theoretically), but that certainly fails if one does.

the central piece of physics that schrödinger ignored in his formulation of quantum mechanics is
special  relativity.  in  fact,  schrödinger did  try  to  incorporate  special  relativity  initially,  but  the
quantum equation to which this led him made predictions that proved to be at odds with experimental
measurements of hydrogen. this inspired schrödinger to adopt the time-honored tradition in physics
of divide and conquer: rather than trying, through one leap, to incorporate all we know about the
physical universe in developing a new theory, it is often far more profitable to take many small steps
that sequentially include the newest discoveries from the forefront of research. schrödinger sought
and  found  a  mathematical  framework  encompassing  the  experimentally  discovered  wave-particle
duality, but he did not, at that early stage of understanding, incorporate special relativity.4

but physicists soon realized that special relativity was central to a proper quantum-mechanical
framework.  this  is  because  the  microscopic  frenzy  requires  that  we  recognize  that  energy  can
manifest itself in a huge variety of ways—a notion that comes from the special relativistic declaration
e  = mc2. by ignoring special relativity, schrödinger's approach ignored the malleability of matter,
energy, and motion.

physicists  focused  their  initial  pathbreaking  efforts  to  merge  special  relativity  with  quantum
concepts  on  the  electromagnetic  force  and  its  interactions  with  matter.  through  a  series  of
inspirational developments, they created quantum electrodynamics. this is an example of what has
come  to  be  called  a relativistic  quantum  field  theory,  or  a quantum  field  theory,  for  short.  it's
quantum because all of the probabilistic and uncertainty issues are incorporated from the outset; it's a
field theory because it merges the quantum principles into the previous classical notion of a force
field—in  this  case,  maxwell's  electromagnetic  field.  and  finally,  it's  relativistic  because  special
relativity is also incorporated from the outset. (if you'd like a visual metaphor for a quantum field,
you can pretty much invoke the image of a classical field—say, as an ocean of invisible field lines
permeating  space—but  you  should  refine  this  image  in  two  ways.  first,  you  should  envision  a
quantum field as composed of particulate ingredients, such as photons for the electromagnetic field.
second,  you  should  imagine  energy,  in  the  form  of  particles'  masses  and  their  motion,  endlessly
shifting back and forth from one quantum field to another as they continually vibrate through space and
time.)

quantum  electrodynamics  is  arguably  the  most  precise  theory  of  natural  phenomena  ever
advanced. an illustration of its precision can be found in the work of toichiro kinoshita, a particle
physicist  from  cornell  university,  who  has,  over  the  last  30  years,  painstakingly  used  quantum
electrodynamics  to  calculate  certain  detailed  properties  of  electrons.  kinoshita's  calculations  fill
thousands  of  pages  and  have  ultimately  required  the  most  powerful  computers  in  the  world  to
complete. but the effort has been well worth it: the calculations yield predictions about electrons that
have  been  experimentally  verified  to  an  accuracy  of  better  than  one  part  in  a  billion.  this  is  an
absolutely astonishing agreement between abstract theoretical calculation and the real world. through
quantum electrodynamics, physicists have been able to solidify the role of photons as the "smallest
possible bundles of light" and to reveal their interactions with electrically charged particles such as
electrons, in a mathematically complete, predictive, and convincing framework.

the success of quantum electrodynamics inspired other physicists in the 1960s and 1970s to try
an analogous approach for developing a quantum-mechanical understanding of the weak, the strong,
and  the  gravitational  forces.  for  the  weak  and  the  strong  forces,  this  proved  to  be  an  immensely
fruitful  line  of  attack.  in  analogy  with  quantum  electrodynamics,  physicists  were  able  to  construct
quantum  field  theories  for  the  strong  and  the  weak  forces,  called quantum  chromodynamics  and
quantum  electroweak  theory.  "quantum  chromodynamics"  is  a  more  colorful  name  than  the  more
logical "quantum strong dynamics," but it is just a name without any deeper meaning; on the other
hand,  the  name  "electroweak"  does  summarize  an  important  milestone  in  our  understanding  of  the
forces of nature.

through  their  nobel  prize–winning  work,  sheldon  glashow,  abdus  salam,  and  steven
weinberg  showed  that  the  weak  and  electromagnetic  forces  are  naturally united  by  their  quantum
field–theoretic description even though their manifestations seem to be utterly distinct in the world
around  us. after  all,  weak  force  fields  diminish  to  almost  vanishing  strength  on  all  but  subatomic
distance scales, whereas electromagnetic fields—visible light, radio and tv signals, x-rays—have
an  indisputable  macroscopic  presence.  nevertheless,  glashow,  salam,  and  weinberg  showed,  in
essence, that at high enough energy and temperature—such as occurred a mere fraction of a second
after  the  big  bang—electromagnetic  and  weak  force  fields dissolve  into  one  another,  take  on
indistinguishable  characteristics,  and  are  more  accurately  called electroweak  fields.  when  the
temperature drops, as it has done steadily since the big bang, the electromagnetic and weak forces
crystallize out in a different manner from their common high-temperature form—through a process
known as symmetry breaking that we will describe later—and therefore appear to be distinct in the
cold universe we currently inhabit.

and  so,  if  you  are  keeping  score,  by  the  1970s  physicists  had  developed  a  sensible  and
successful quantum-mechanical description of three of the four forces (strong, weak, electromagnetic)
and had shown that two of the three (weak and electromagnetic) actually share a common origin (the
electroweak force). during the past two decades, physicists have subjected this quantum-mechanical
treatment of the three nongravitational forces—as they act among themselves and the matter particles
introduced  in  chapter  1—to  an  enormous  amount  of  experimental  scrutiny.  the  theory  has  met  all
such challenges with aplomb. once experimentalists measure some 19 parameters (the masses of the
particles  in  table  1.1,  their  force  charges  as  recorded  in  the  table  in  endnote  1  to  chapter  1,  the
strengths of the three nongravitational forces in table 1.2, as well as a few other numbers we need
not discuss), and theorists input these numbers into the quantum field theories of the matter particles
and the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces, the subsequent predictions of the theory regarding
the  microcosmos  agree  spectacularly  with  experimental  results.  this  is  true  up  to  the  energies

capable of pulverizing matter into bits as small as a billionth of a billionth of a meter, the current
technological limit. for this reason, physicists call the theory of the three nongravitational forces and
the  three  families  of  matter  particles  the  standard  theory,  or  (more  often)  the standard  model  of
particle physics.

messenger particles

according to the standard model, just as the photon is the smallest constituent of an electromagnetic
field, the strong and the weak force fields have smallest constituents as well. as we discussed briefly
in chapter 1, the smallest bundles of the strong force are known as gluons, and those of the weak
force are known as weak gauge bosons (or more precisely, the w and z bosons). the standard model
instructs us to think of these force particles as having no internal structure—in this framework they
are every bit as elementary as the particles in the three families of matter.

the  photons,  gluons,  and  weak  gauge  bosons  provide  the  microscopic  mechanism  for
transmitting  the  forces  they  constitute.  for  example,  when  one  electrically  charged  particle  repels
another of like electric charge, you can think of it roughly in terms of each particle being surrounded
by  an  electric  field—a  "cloud"  or  "mist"  of  "electric-essence"—and  the  force  each  particle  feels
arises  from  the  repulsion  between  their  respective  force  fields.  the  more  precise  microscopic
description of how they repel each other, though, is somewhat different. an electromagnetic field is
composed of a swarm of photons; the interaction between two charged particles actually arises from
their "shooting" photons back and forth between themselves. in rough analogy to the way in which you
can affect a fellow ice-skater's motion and your own by hurling a barrage of bowling balls at him or
her, two electrically charged particles influence each other by exchanging these smallest bundles of
light.

an important failing of the ice-skater analogy is that the exchange of bowling balls is always
"repulsive"—it  always  drives  the  skaters  apart.  on  the  contrary,  two  oppositely  charged  particles
also  interact  through  the  exchange  of  photons,  although  the  resulting  electromagnetic  force  is
attractive.  it's  as  if  the  photon  is  not  so  much  the  transmitter  of  the  force  per  se,  but  rather  the
transmitter of a message of how the recipient must respond to the force in question. for like-charged
particles,  the  photon  carries  the  message  "move  apart,"  while  for  oppositely  charged  particles  it
carries  the  message  "come  together."  for  this  reason  the  photon  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  the
messenger particle for the electromagnetic force. similarly, the gluons and weak gauge bosons are
the messenger particles for the strong and weak nuclear forces. the strong force, which keeps quarks
locked  up  inside  of  protons  and  neutrons,  arises  from  individual  quarks  exchanging  gluons.  the
gluons, so to speak, provide the "glue" that keeps these subatomic particles stuck together. the weak
force, which is responsible for certain kinds of particle transmutations involved in radioactive decay,
is mediated by the weak gauge bosons.

gauge symmetry

you may have realized that the odd man out in our discussion of the quantum theory of the forces of
nature is gravity. given the successful approach physicists have used with the other three forces, you
might suggest that physicists seek a quantum field theory of the gravitational force—a theory in which

recall that the gravitational force allows us to declare that all observers—regardless of their
state of motion—are on absolutely equal footing. even those whom we would normally think of as
accelerating  may  claim  to  be  at  rest,  since  they  can  attribute  the  force  they  feel  to  their  being
immersed in a gravitational field. in this sense, gravity enforces the symmetry: it ensures the equal
validity of all possible observational points of view, all possible frames of reference. the similarity
with the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces is that they too are all connected with enforcing
symmetries, albeit ones that are significantly more abstract than the one associated with gravity.

to  get  a  rough  feel  for  these  rather  subtle  symmetry  principles,  let's  consider  one  important
example. as we recorded in the table in endnote 1 of chapter 1, each quark comes in three "colors"
(fancifully called red, green, and blue, although these are merely labels and have no relation to color
in the usual visual sense), which determine how it responds to the strong force in much the same way
that its electric charge determines how it responds to the electromagnetic force. all the data that have
been collected establish that there is a symmetry among the quarks in the sense that the interactions
between  any  two  like-colored  quarks  (red  with  red,  green  with  green,  or  blue  with  blue)  are  all
identical,  and  similarly,  the  interactions  between  any  two  unlike-colored  quarks  (red  with  green,
green with blue, or blue with red) are also identical. in fact, the data support something even more
striking. if the three colors—the three different strong charges—that a quark can carry were all shifted
in a particular manner (roughly speaking, in our fanciful chromatic language, if red, green, and blue
were shifted, for instance, to yellow, indigo, and violet), and even if the details of this shift were to
change from moment to moment or from place to place, the interactions between the quarks would be,
again,  completely  unchanged.  for  this  reason,  just  as  we  say  that  a  sphere  exemplifies  rotational
symmetry because it looks the same regardless of how we rotate it around in our hands or how we
shift the angle from which we view it, we say that the universe exemplifies strong force symmetry:
physics  is  unchanged  by—it  is  completely  insensitive  to—these  force-charge  shifts.  for  historical
reasons, physicists also say that the strong force symmetry is an example of a gauge symmetry.5

the smallest bundle of a gravitational force field, the graviton, would be its messenger particle. at
first sight, as we now note, this suggestion would appear to be particularly apt because the quantum
field theory of the three nongravitational forces reveals that there is a tantalizing similarity between
them and an aspect of the gravitational force we encountered in chapter 3.

here  is  the  essential  point.  just  as  the  symmetry  between  all  possible  observational  vantage
points in general relativity requires the existence of the gravitational force, developments relying on
work of hermann weyl in the 1920s and chen-ning yang and robert mills in the 1950s showed that
gauge  symmetries  require  the  existence  of  yet  other  forces.  much  like  a  sensitive  environmental-
control system that keeps temperature, air pressure, and humidity in an area completely constant by
compensating perfectly for any exterior influences, certain kinds of force fields, according to yang
and mills, will provide perfect compensation for shifts in force charges, thereby keeping the physical
interactions  between  the  particles  completely  unchanged.  for  the  case  of  the  gauge  symmetry
associated with shifting quark-color charges, the required force is none other than the strong force
itself.  that  is,  without  the  strong  force,  physics would  change  under  the  kinds  of  shifts  of  color
charges indicated above. this realization shows that, although the gravitational force and the strong
force have vastly different properties (recall, for example, that gravity is far feebler than the strong
force and operates over enormously larger distances), they do have a somewhat similar heritage: they
are  each  required  in  order  that  the  universe  embody  particular  symmetries.  moreover,  a  similar
discussion applies to the weak and electromagnetic forces, showing that their existence, too, is bound
up with yet other gauge symmetries—the so-called weak and electromagnetic gauge symmetries. and

hence, all four forces are directly associated with principles of symmetry.

this common feature of the four forces would seem to bode well for the suggestion made at the
beginning  of  this  section.  namely,  in  our  effort  to  incorporate  quantum  mechanics  into  general
relativity we should seek a quantum field theory of the gravitational force, much as physicists have
discovered successful quantum field theories of the other three forces. over the years, such reasoning
has inspired a prodigious and distinguished group of physicists to follow this path vigorously, but the
terrain has proven to be fraught with danger, and no one has succeeded in traversing it completely.
let's see why.

general relativity vs. quantum mechanics

the usual realm of applicability of general relativity is that of large, astronomical distance scales. on
such  distances  einstein's  theory  implies  that  the  absence  of  mass  means  that  space  is  flat,  as
illustrated in figure 3.3. in seeking to merge general relativity with quantum mechanics we must now
change  our  focus  sharply  and  examine  the microscopic  properties  of  space.  we  illustrate  this  in
figure 5.1 by zooming in and sequentially magnifying ever smaller regions of the spatial fabric. at
first, as we zoom in, not much happens; as we see in the first three levels of magnification in figure
5.1, the structure of space retains the same basic form. reasoning from a purely classical standpoint,
we would expect this placid and flat image of space to persist all the way to arbitrarily small length
scales.  but  quantum  mechanics  changes  this  conclusion  radically. everything  is  subject  to  the
quantum  fluctuations  inherent  in  the  uncertainty  principle—even  the  gravitational  field.  although
classical reasoning implies that empty space has zero gravitational field, quantum mechanics shows
that on average it is zero, but that its actual value undulates up and down due to quantum fluctuations.
moreover, the uncertainty principle tells us that the size of the undulations of the gravitational field
gets  larger  as  we  focus  our  attention  on  smaller  regions  of  space.  quantum  mechanics  shows  that
nothing likes to be cornered; narrowing the spatial focus leads to ever larger undulations.

as  gravitational  fields  are  reflected  by  curvature,  these  quantum  fluctuations  manifest
themselves as increasingly violent distortions of the surrounding space. we see the glimmers of such
distortions emerging in the fourth level of magnification in figure 5.1. by probing to even smaller
distance scales, as we do in the fifth level of figure 5.1, we see that the random quantum mechanical
undulations in the gravitational field correspond to such severe warpings of space that it no longer
resembles  a  gently  curving  geometrical  object  such  as  the  rubber-membrane  analogy  used  in  our
discussion  in  chapter  3.  rather,  it  takes  on  the  frothing,  turbulent,  twisted  form  illustrated  in  the
uppermost  part  of  the  figure.  john  wheeler  coined  the  term quantum  foam  to  describe  the  frenzy
revealed by such an ultramicroscopic examination of space (and time)—it describes an unfamiliar
arena of the universe in which the conventional notions of left and right, back and forth, up and down
(and even of before and after) lose their meaning. it is on such short distance scales that we encounter
the fundamental incompatibility between general relativity and quantum mechanics. the notion of a
smooth  spatial  geometry,  the  central  principle  of  general  relativity,  is  destroyed  by  the  violent
fluctuations of the quantum world on short distance scales. on ultramicroscopic scales, the central
feature of quantum mechanics—the uncertainty principle—is in direct conflict with the central feature
of general relativity—the smooth geometrical model of space (and of spacetime).

figure  5.1  by  sequentially  magnifying  a  region  of  space,  its  ultramicroscopic  properties  can  be
probed.  attempts  to  merge  general  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics  run  up  against  the  violent
quantum foam emerging at the highest level of magnification.

in practice, this conflict rears its head in a very concrete manner. calculations that merge the
equations  of  general  relativity  and  those  of  quantum  mechanics  typically  yield  one  and  the  same
ridiculous answer: infinity. like a sharp rap on the wrist from an old-time schoolteacher, an infinite
answer is nature's way of telling us that we are doing something that is quite wrong.6 the equations of
general relativity cannot handle the roiling frenzy of quantum foam.

notice,  however,  that  as  we  recede  to  more  ordinary  distances  (following  the  sequence  of
drawings in figure 5.1 in reverse), the random, violent small-scale undulations cancel each other out
—in  much  the  same  way  that,  on  average,  our  compulsive  borrower's  bank  account  shows  no
evidence of his compulsion—and the concept of a smooth geometry for the fabric of the universe once
again becomes accurate. it's like what you experience when you look at a dot-matrix picture: from far
away the dots that compose the picture blend together and create the impression of a smooth image
whose  variations  in  lightness  seamlessly  and  gently  change  from  one  area  to  another.  when  you
inspect  the  picture  on  finer  distance  scales  you  realize,  however,  that  it  markedly  differs  from  its
smooth, long-distance appearance. it is nothing but a collection of discrete dots, each quite separate

from the others. but note that you become aware of the discrete nature of the picture only when you
examine it on the smallest of scales; from far away it looks smooth. similarly, the fabric of spacetime
appears to be smooth except when examined with ultramicroscopic precision. this is why general
relativity  works  on  large  enough  distance  (and  time)  scales—the  scales  relevant  for  many  typical
astronomical  applications—but  is  rendered  inconsistent  on  short  distance  (and  time)  scales.  the
central tenet of a smooth and gently curving geometry is justified in the large but breaks down due to
quantum fluctuations when pushed to the small.

the  basic  principles  of  general  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics  allow  us  to  calculate  the
approximate  distance  scales  below  which  one  would  have  to  shrink  in  order  for  the  pernicious
phenomenon of figure 5.1 to become apparent. the smallness of planck's constant—which governs
the strength of quantum effects—and the intrinsic weakness of the gravitational force team up to yield
a result called the planck length, which is small almost beyond imagination: a millionth of a billionth
of  a  billionth  of  a  billionth  of  a  centimeter  (10-33  centimeter).7  the  fifth  level  in  figure  5.1  thus
schematically  depicts  the  ultramicroscopic,  sub–planck  length  landscape  of  the  universe.  to  get  a
sense of scale, if we were to magnify an atom to the size of the known universe, the planck length
would barely expand to the height of an average tree.

and  so  we  see  that  the  incompatability  between  general  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics
becomes apparent only in a rather esoteric realm of the universe. for this reason you might well ask
whether it's worth worrying about. in fact, the physics community does not speak with a unified voice
when  addressing  this  issue.  there  are  those  physicists  who  are  willing  to  note  the  problem,  but
happily go about using quantum mechanics and general relativity for problems whose typical lengths
far exceed the planck length, as their research requires. there are other physicists, however, who are
deeply unsettled by the fact that the two foundational pillars of physics as we know it are at their core
fundamentally  incompatible,  regardless  of  the  ultramicroscopic  distances  that  must  be  probed  to
expose the problem. the incompatibility, they argue, points to an essential flaw in our understanding
of  the  physical  universe.  this  opinion  rests  on  an  unprovable  but  profoundly  felt  view  that  the
universe,  if  understood  at  its  deepest  and  most  elementary  level,  can  be  described  by  a  logically
sound  theory  whose  parts  are  harmoniously  united.  and  surely,  regardless  of  how  central  this
incompatibility is to their own research, most physicists find it hard to believe that, at rock bottom,
our  deepest  theoretical  understanding  of  the  universe  will  be  composed  of  a  mathematically
inconsistent patchwork of two powerful yet conflicting explanatory frameworks.

physicists  have  made  numerous  attempts  at  modifying  either  general  relativity  or  quantum
mechanics  in  some  manner  so  as  to  avoid  the  conflict,  but  the  attempts,  although  often  bold  and
ingenious, have met with failure after failure.

that is, until the discovery of superstring theory.8

part iii

the cosmic symphony

chapter 6

nothing but music: the essentials of superstring theory

music has long since provided the metaphors of choice for those puzzling over questions of cosmic
concern. from the ancient pythagorean "music of the spheres" to the "harmonies of nature" that have
guided  inquiry  through  the  ages,  we  have  collectively  sought  the  song  of  nature  in  the  gentle
wanderings  of  celestial  bodies  and  the  riotous  fulminations  of  subatomic  particles.  with  the
discovery of superstring theory, musical metaphors take on a startling reality, for the theory suggests
that the microscopic landscape is suffused with tiny strings whose vibrational patterns orchestrate the
evolution  of  the  cosmos.  the  winds  of  change,  according  to  superstring  theory,  gust  through  an
aeolian universe.

by contrast, the standard model views the elementary constituents of the universe as pointlike
ingredients  with  no  internal  structure.  as  powerful  as  this  approach  is  (as  we  have  mentioned,
essentially  every  prediction  about  the  microworld  made  by  the  standard  model  has  been  verified
down to about a billionth of a billionth of a meter, the present-day technological limit), the standard
model cannot be a complete or final theory because it does not include gravity. moreover, attempts to
incorporate gravity into its quantum-mechanical framework have failed due to the violent fluctuations
in  the  spatial  fabric  that  appear  at  ultramicroscopic  distances—that  is,  distances  shorter  than  the
planck  length.  the  unresolved  conflict  has  impelled  a  search  for  an  even  deeper  understanding  of
nature. in 1984, the physicists michael green, then of queen mary college, and john schwarz of the
california institute of technology provided the first piece of convincing evidence that superstring
theory (or string theory, for short) might well provide this understanding.

string  theory  offers  a  novel  and  profound  modification  to  our  theoretical  description  of  the
ultramicroscopic properties of the universe—a modification that, physicists slowly realized, alters
einstein's general relativity in just the right way to make it fully compatible with the laws of quantum
mechanics.  according  to  string  theory,  the  elementary  ingredients  of  the  universe  are not  point
particles. rather, they are tiny, one-dimensional filaments somewhat like infinitely thin rubber bands,
vibrating to and fro. but don't let the name fool you: unlike an ordinary piece of string, which is itself
composed of molecules and atoms, the strings of string theory are purported to lie deep within the
heart  of  matter.  the  theory  proposes  that they  are  ultramicroscopic  ingredients  making  up  the
particles  out  of  which  atoms  themselves  are  made.  the  strings  of  string  theory  are  so  small—on
average they are about as long as the planck length—that they appear pointlike even when examined
with our most powerful equipment.

yet  the  simple  replacement  of  point  particles  with  strands  of  string  as  the  fundamental
ingredients of everything has far-reaching consequences. first and foremost, string theory appears to
resolve the conflict between general relativity and quantum mechanics. as we shall see, the spatially
extended nature of a string is the crucial new element allowing for a single harmonious framework
incorporating both theories. second, string theory provides a truly unified theory, since all matter and
all forces are proposed to arise from one basic ingredient: oscillating strings. finally, as discussed

more fully in subsequent chapters, beyond these remarkable achievements, string theory once again
radically changes our understanding of spacetime.1

a brief history of string theory

in  1968,  a  young  theoretical  physicist  named  gabriele  veneziano  was  struggling  to  make  sense  of
various experimentally observed properties of the strong nuclear force. veneziano, then a research
fellow at cern, the european accelerator laboratory in geneva, switzerland, had worked on aspects
of this problem for a number of years, until one day he came upon a striking revelation. much to his
surprise,  he  realized  that  an  esoteric  formula  concocted  for  purely  mathematical  pursuits  by  the
renowned swiss mathematician leonhard euler some two hundred years earlier—the so-called euler
beta-function—seemed to describe numerous properties of strongly interacting particles in one fell
swoop. veneziano's observation provided a powerful mathematical encapsulation of many features of
the strong force and it launched an intense flurry of research aimed at using euler's beta-function, and
various  generalizations,  to  describe  the  surfeit  of  data  being  collected  at  various  atom  smashers
around the world. nevertheless, there was a sense in which veneziano's observation was incomplete.
like memorized formulae used by a student who does not understand their meaning or justification,
euler's  beta-function  seemed  to  work,  but  no  one  knew  why.  it  was  a  formula  in  search  of  an
explanation. this changed in 1970 when the works of yoichiro nambu of the university of chicago,
holger nielsen of the niels bohr institute, and leonard susskind of stanford university revealed the
hitherto-unknown  physics  lurking  behind  euler's  formula.  these  physicists  showed  that  if  one
modeled elementary particles as little, vibrating, one-dimensional strings, their nuclear interactions
could  be  described  exactly  by  euler's  function.  if  the  pieces  of  string  were  small  enough,  they
reasoned, they would still look like point particles, and hence could be consistent with experimental
observations.

although  this  provided  an  intuitively  simple  and  pleasing  theory,  it  was  not  long  before  the
string  description  of  the  strong  force  was  shown  to  fail.  during  the  early  1970s,  high-energy
experiments capable of probing the subatomic world more deeply showed that the string model made
a number of predictions that were in direct conflict with observations. at the same time, the point-
particle  quantum  field  theory  of  quantum  chromodynamics  was  being  developed,  and  its
overwhelming success in describing the strong force led to the dismissal of string theory.

most particle physicists thought that string theory had been relegated to the dustbin of science,
but a few dedicated researchers kept at it. schwarz, for instance, felt that "the mathematical structure
of string theory was so beautiful and had so many miraculous properties that it had to be pointing
toward something deep."2 one of the problems physicists found with string theory was that it seemed
to have a true embarrassment of riches. the theory contained configurations of vibrating string that
had properties akin to those of gluons, substantiating its early claim of being a theory of the strong
force. but beyond these it contained additional messenger-like particles that did not appear to have
any relevance to experimental observations of the strong force. in 1974, schwarz and joël scherk of
the  ecole  normale  superieure  made  a  bold  leap  that  transformed  this  apparent  vice  into  a  virtue.
after  studying  the  puzzling  messenger-like  patterns  of  string  vibration,  they  realized  that  their
properties matched perfectly those of the hypothesized messenger particle of the gravitational force—
the  graviton. although  these  "smallest  bundles"  of  the  gravitational  force  have,  as  yet,  never  been
seen, theorists can confidently predict certain basic features that they must possess, and scherk and

schwarz found these properties to be realized exactly by certain vibrational patterns. based on this,
scherk and schwarz suggested that string theory had failed in its initial attempt because physicists had
unduly constrained its scope. string theory is not just a theory of the strong force, they proclaimed; it
is a quantum theory that includes gravity as well.3

the  physics  community  did  not  receive  this  suggestion  with  unbridled  enthusiasm.  in  fact,
schwarz recounts that "our work was universally ignored."4 the path of progress was already littered
with numerous failed attempts to unite gravity and quantum mechanics. string theory had been shown
wrong in its initial effort to describe the strong force, and it seemed to many that it was senseless to
try to use the theory to pursue an even grander goal. even more devastating, subsequent studies during
the late 1970s and early 1980s showed that string theory and quantum mechanics suffered from their
own subtle conflicts. it appeared that the gravitational force had, once again, resisted incorporation
into the microscopic description of the universe.

such  was  the  case  until  1984.  in  a  landmark  paper  culminating  more  than  a  dozen  years  of
intense research that had been largely ignored and often outright dismissed by most physicists, green
and schwarz established that the subtle quantum conflict afflicting string theory could be resolved.
moreover, they showed that the resulting theory had sufficient breadth to encompass all of the four
forces  and  all  of  matter  as  well. as  word  of  this  result  spread  throughout  the  worldwide  physics
community, particle physicists by the hundreds dropped their research projects to launch a full-scale
assault on what appeared to be the last theoretical battleground in the ancient quest to understand the
deepest workings of the universe.

i  began  graduate  school  at  oxford  university  in  october  1984. although  i  was  excited  to  be
learning  about  the  likes  of  quantum  field  theory,  gauge  theory,  and  general  relativity,  there  was  a
pervasive  feeling  among  the  older  graduate  students  that  there  was  little  or  no  future  for  particle
physics.  the  standard  model  was  in  place  and  its  remarkable  success  at  predicting  experimental
outcomes indicated that its verification was merely a matter of time and details. going beyond its
limits  to  include  gravity  and  possibly  to explain the experimental input on which it relies—the 19
numbers summarizing the elementary particle masses, their force charges, and the relative strengths of
the  forces,  numbers  that  are  known  from  experiment  but  are  not  understood  theoretically—was  so
daunting a task that all but the most courageous physicists recoiled at the challenge. but six months
later  the  mood  had  swung  completely  around.  the  success  of  green  and  schwarz  finally  trickled
down  even  to  first-year  graduate  students,  and  an  electrifying  sense  of  being  on  the  inside  of  a
profound moment in the history of physics displaced the previous ennui. a number of us consistently
worked  deep  into  the  night  to  try  to  master  the  vast  areas  of  theoretical  physics  and  abstract
mathematics that are required to understand string theory.

the period from 1984 to 1986 has come to be known as the "first superstring revolution." during
those three years more than a thousand research papers on string theory were written by physicists
from  around  the  world.  these  works  showed  conclusively  that  numerous  features  of  the  standard
model—features  that  had  been  painstakingly  discovered  over  the  course  of  decades  of  research
—emerged naturally  and  simply  from  the  grand  structure  of  string  theory. as  michael  green  has
said, "the moment you encounter string theory and realize that almost all of the major developments
in physics over the last hundred years emerge—and emerge with such elegance—from such a simple
starting point, you realize that this incredibly compelling theory is in a class of its own."5 moreover,
for many of these features, as we shall discuss, string theory offers a far fuller and more satisfying
explanation than is found in the standard model. these developments convinced many physicists that
string theory was well on its way to fulfilling its promise of being the ultimate unified theory.

nonetheless, over and over again string theorists encountered a significant stumbling block. in
theoretical  physics  research,  one  is  frequently  confronted  with  equations  that  are  just  too  hard  to
understand  or  to  analyze.  typically,  physicists  don't  give  up,  but  try  to  solve  the  equations
approximately. the situation in string theory is even more difficult. even determining the equations
themselves  has  proved  to  be  so  difficult  that  only  approximate  versions  of  them  have  so  far  been
deduced. string theorists have thereby been limited to finding approximate solutions to approximate
equations. after the few years of dramatic progress during the first superstring revolution, physicists
found that the approximations being used were inadequate to answer a number of essential questions
hindering  further  developments.  with  no  concrete  proposals  for  going  beyond  the  approximate
methods, many physicists working on string theory grew frustrated and returned to their previous lines
of research. for those who remained, the late 1980s and early 1990s were trying times. like a golden
treasure securely locked in a safe and visible only through a tiny, tantalizing peephole, the beauty and
promise of string theory beckoned, but no one had the key to unlock its power. long dry spells were
periodically punctuated by important discoveries, but it was clear to everyone in the field that new
methods with the power to go beyond the previous approximations were required.

then, in a breathtaking lecture at the strings 1995 conference held at the university of southern
california—a lecture that stunned a packed audience of the world's top physicists—edward witten
announced a plan for taking the next step, thereby igniting the "second superstring revolution." string
theorists, as of this writing, are working vigorously to sharpen a set of new methods that promise to
overcome  the  theoretical  obstacles  previously  encountered.  the  difficulties  that  lie  ahead  will
severely test the technical might of the world's superstring theorists, but the light at the end of the
tunnel, although still distant, may finally be becoming visible.

in this chapter and a number that follow, we shall describe the understanding of string theory that
emerged  from  the  first  superstring  revolution  and  subsequent  work  prior  to  the  second  superstring
revolution. from time to time we will indicate new insights stemming from the latter; our discussion
of these most recent advances will come in chapters 12 and 13.

the greeks' atoms, again?

as we mentioned at the outset of this chapter and as illustrated in figure 1.1, string theory claims that
if  the  presumed  point-particles  of  the  standard  model  could  be  examined  with  a  precision
significantly beyond our present capacity, each would be seen to be made of a single, tiny, oscillating
loop of string.

for reasons that will become clear, the length of a typical string loop is about the planck length,
about a hundred billion billion (1020) times smaller than an atomic nucleus. it is no wonder that our
present-day experiments are unable to resolve the microscopic stringy nature of matter: strings are
minute even on the scales set by subatomic particles. we would need an accelerator to slam matter
together with energies some million billion times more powerful than any previously constructed in
order to reveal directly that a string is not a point-particle.

we will describe shortly the stunning implications that follow from replacing point-particles by

strings, but let's first address a more basic question: what are strings made of?

there are two possible answers to this question. first, strings are truly fundamental—they are
"atoms," uncuttable constituents, in the truest sense of the ancient greeks. as the absolute smallest
constituents  of  anything  and  everything,  they  represent  the  end  of  the  line—the  last  of  the  russian

matrioshka  dolls—in  the  numerous  layers  of  substructure  in  the  microscopic  world.  from  this
perspective, even though strings have spatial extent, the question of their composition is without any
content.  were  strings  to  be  made  of  something  smaller  they  would  not  be  fundamental.  instead,
whatever strings were composed of would immediately displace them and lay claim to being an even
more  basic  constituent  of  the  universe.  using  our  linguistic  analogy,  paragraphs  are  made  of
sentences, sentences are made of words, and words are made of letters. what makes up a letter? from
a linguistic standpoint, that's the end of the line. letters are letters—they are the fundamental building
blocks  of  written  language;  there  is  no  further  substructure.  questioning  their  composition  has  no
meaning.  similarly,  a  string  is  simply  a  string—as  there  is  nothing  more  fundamental,  it  can't  be
described as being composed of any other substance.

that's the first answer. the second answer is based on the simple fact that as yet we do not
know if string theory is a correct or final theory of nature. if string theory is truly off the mark, then,
well,  we  can  forget  strings  and  the  irrelevant  question  of  their  composition.  although  this  is  a
possibility, research since the mid-1980s overwhelmingly points toward its being extremely unlikely.
but history surely has taught us that every time our understanding of the universe deepens, we find yet
smaller  microscopic  ingredients  constituting  a  finer  level  of  matter.  and  so  another  possibility,
should strings fail to be the final theory, is that they are one more layer in the cosmic onion, a layer
that becomes visible at the planck length, although not the final layer. in this case, strings could be
made up of yet-smaller structures. string theorists have raised and continue to pursue this possibility.
to date there are intriguing hints in theoretical studies that strings may have further substructure, but
there is as yet no definitive evidence. only time and intense research will supply the final word on
this question.

aside  from  a  few  speculations  in  chapters  12  and  15,  for  our  discussion  here  we  approach
strings in the manner proposed in the first answer—that is, we will take strings to be nature's most
fundamental ingredient.

unification through string theory

besides  its  inability  to  incorporate  the  gravitational  force,  the  standard  model  has  another
shortcoming:  there  is  no  explanation  for  the  details  of  its  construction.  why  did  nature  select  the
particular list of particles and forces outlined in previous chapters and recorded in tables 1.1 and
1.2? why do the 19 parameters that describe these ingredients quantitatively have the values that they
do? you  can't  help  feeling  that  their  number  and  detailed  properties  seem  so  arbitrary.  is  there  a
deeper  understanding  lurking  behind  these  seemingly  random  ingredients,  or  were  the  detailed
physical properties of the universe "chosen" by happenstance?

the standard model itself cannot possibly offer an explanation since it takes the list of particles
and their properties as experimentally measured input. just as the performance of the stock market
cannot  be  used  to  determine  the  value  of  your  portfolio  without  the  input  data  of  your  initial
investments, the standard model cannot be used to make any predictions without the input data of the
fundamental  particle  properties.6 after  experimental  particle  physicists  fastidiously  measure  these
data,  theorists  can  then  use  the  standard  model  to  make  testable  predictions,  such  as  what  should
happen when particular particles are slammed together in an accelerator. but the standard model can
no  more  explain  the  fundamental  particle  properties  of  tables  1.1  and  1.2  than  the  dow  jones
average today can explain your initial investment in stocks ten years ago.

in  fact,  had  experiments  revealed  a  somewhat  different  particle  content  in  the  microscopic
world,  possibly  interacting  with  somewhat  different  forces,  these  changes  could  have  been  fairly
easily incorporated in the standard model by providing the theory with different input parameters. the
structure of the standard model, in this sense, is too flexible to be able to explain the properties of the
elementary particles, as it could have accommodated a range of possibilities.

string theory is dramatically different. it is a unique and inflexible theoretical edifice. it requires
no input beyond a single number, described below, that sets the benchmark scale for measurements.
all properties of the microworld are within the realm of its explanatory power. to understand this,
let's first think about more familiar strings, such as those on a violin. each such string can undergo a
huge variety (in fact, infinite in number) of different vibrational patterns known as resonances, such
as those shown in figure 6.1. these are the wave patterns whose peaks and troughs are evenly spaced
and  fit  perfectly  between  the  string's  two  fixed  endpoints.  our  ears  sense  these  different  resonant
vibrational patterns as different musical notes. the strings in string theory have similar properties.
there are resonant vibrational patterns that the string can support by virtue of their evenly spaced
peaks  and  troughs  exactly  fitting  along  its  spatial  extent.  some  examples  are  given  in  figure  6.2.
here's the central fact: just as the different vibrational patterns of a violin string give rise to different
musical  notes, the  different  vibrational  patterns  of  a  fundamental  string  give  rise  to  different
masses and force charges. as this is a crucial point, let's say it again. according to string theory, the
properties of an elementary "particle"—its mass and its various force charges—are determined by the
precise resonant pattern of vibration that its internal string executes.

figure 6.1 strings on a violin can vibrate in resonant patterns in which a whole number of peaks and
troughs exactly fit between the two ends.

it's  easiest  to  understand  this  association  for  a  particle's  mass.  the  energy  of  a  particular
vibrational string pattern depends on its amplitude—the maximum displacement between peaks and
troughs—and  its  wavelength—the  separation  between  one  peak  and  the  next.  the  greater  the
amplitude and the shorter the wavelength, the greater the energy. this reflects what you would expect
intuitively—more  frantic  vibrational  patterns  have  more  energy,  while  less  frantic  ones  have  less
energy. we give a couple of examples in figure 6.3. this is again familiar, as violin strings that are
plucked more vigorously will vibrate more wildly, while those plucked more gingerly will vibrate
more gently. now, from special relativity we know that energy and mass are two sides of the same
coin: greater energy means greater mass, and vice versa. thus, according to string theory, the mass of
an  elementary  particle  is  determined  by  the energy  of  the  vibrational  pattern  of  its  internal  string.

heavier particles have internal strings that vibrate more energetically, while lighter particles have
internal strings that vibrate less energetically.

figure 6.2 the loops in string theory can vibrate in resonance patterns—similar to those of violin
strings—in which a whole number of peaks and troughs fit along their spatial extent.

since the mass of a particle determines its gravitational properties, we see that there is a direct
association between the pattern of string vibration and a particle's response to the gravitational force.
although  the  reasoning  involved  is  somewhat  more  abstract,  physicists  have  found  that  a  similar
alignment exists between other detailed aspects of a string's pattern of vibration and its properties vis
a vis other forces. the electric charge, the weak charge, and the strong charge carried by a particular
string, for instance, are determined by the precise way it vibrates. moreover, exactly the same idea
holds for the messenger particles themselves. particles like photons, weak gauge bosons, and gluons
are yet other resonant patterns of string vibration. and of particular importance, among the vibrational
string patterns, one matches perfectly the properties of the graviton, ensuring that gravity is an integral
part of string theory.7

so we see that, according to string theory, the observed properties of each elementary particle
arise because its internal string undergoes a particular resonant vibrational pattern. this perspective
differs sharply from that espoused by physicists before the discovery of string theory; in the earlier
perspective the differences among the fundamental particles were explained by saying that, in effect,
each  particle  species  was  "cut  from  a  different  fabric."  although  each  particle  was  viewed  as
elementary,  the  kind  of  "stuff"  each  embodied  was  thought  to  be  different.  electron  "stuff,"  for
example,  had  negative  electric  charge,  while  neutrino  "stuff"  had  no  electric  charge.  string  theory
alters this picture radically by declaring that the "stuff" of all matter and all forces is the same. each
elementary particle is composed of a single string—that is, each particle is a single string—and all
strings  are  absolutely  identical.  differences  between  the  particles  arise  because  their  respective
strings  undergo  different  resonant  vibrational  patterns.  what  appear  to  be  different  elementary
particles are actually different "notes" on a fundamental string. the universe—being composed of an
enormous number of these vibrating strings—is akin to a cosmic symphony.

figure 6.3 more frantic vibrational patterns have more energy than less frantic ones.

this  overview  shows  how  string  theory  offers  a  truly  wonderful  unifying  framework.  every

particle of matter and every transmitter of force consists of a string whose pattern of vibration is its
"fingerprint."  because  every  physical  event,  process,  or  occurrence  in  the  universe  is,  at  its  most
elementary  level,  describable  in  terms  of  forces  acting  between  these  elementary  material
constituents, string theory provides the promise of a single, all-inclusive, unified description of the
physical universe: a theory of everything (t.o.e.).

the music of string theory

even though string theory does away with the previous concept of structureless elementary particles,
old language dies hard, especially when it provides an accurate description of reality down to the
most  minute  of  distance  scales.  following  the  common  practice  of  the  field  we  shall  therefore
continue to refer to "elementary particles," yet we will always mean "what appear to be elementary
particles but are actually tiny pieces of vibrating string." in the preceding section we proposed that
the masses and the force charges of such elementary particles are the result of the way in which their
respective  strings  are  vibrating.  this  leads  us  to  the  following  realization:  if  we  can  work  out
precisely the allowed resonant vibrational patterns of fundamental strings—the "notes," so to speak,
that they can play—we should be able to explain the observed properties of the elementary particles.
for the first time, therefore, string theory sets up a framework for explaining the properties of the
particles observed in nature.

at  this  stage,  then,  we  should  "grab  hold"  of  a  string  and  "pluck"  it  in  all  sorts  of  ways  to
determine the possible resonant patterns of vibration. if string theory is right, we should find that the
possible patterns yield exactly the observed properties of the matter and force particles in tables 1.1
and 1.2. of course, a string is too small to carry out this experiment literally as described. rather, by
using mathematical descriptions we can theoretically pluck a string. in the mid-1980s, many string
adherents believed that the mathematical analysis required for doing this was on the verge of being
able  to  explain  every  detailed  property  of  the  universe  on  its  most  microscopic  level.  some
enthusiastic physicists declared that the t.o.e. had finally been discovered. more than a decade of
hindsight has shown that the euphoria generated by this belief was premature. string theory has the
makings of a t.o.e., but a number of hurdles remain, preventing us from deducing the spectrum of
string vibrations with the precision necessary to compare with experimental results. at the present
time,  therefore,  we  do  not  know  if  the  fundamental  characteristics  of  our  universe,  summarized  in
tables 1.1 and 1.2, can be explained by string theory. as we will discuss in chapter 9, under certain
assumptions that we will clearly state, string theory can give rise to a universe with properties that
are in qualitative agreement with the known particle and force data, but extracting detailed numerical
predictions from the theory is currently beyond our abilities. and so, although the framework of string
theory, unlike that of the point-particle standard model, is capable of giving an explanation for why
the particles and forces have the properties they do, we have not, as yet, been able to extract it. but
remarkably, string theory is so rich and far-reaching that, even though we cannot yet determine its
most detailed properties, we are able to gain insight into a wealth of the new physical phenomena that
follow from the theory, as we will see in subsequent chapters.

in the following chapters we shall also discuss the status of the hurdles in some detail, but it is
instructive first to understand them at a general level. strings in the world around us come with a
variety  of  tensions.  the  string  laced  through  a  pair  of  shoes,  for  example,  is  usually  quite  slack
compared to the string stretched from one end of a violin to another. both of these, in turn, are under

far less tension than the steel strings of a piano. the one number that string theory requires in order to
set its overall scale is the corresponding tension on its loops. how is this tension determined? well,
if we could pluck a fundamental string we would learn about its stiffness, and in this way we could
measure its tension much as is done to measure the tension of more familiar everyday strings. but
since fundamental strings are so tiny, this approach cannot be carried out and a more indirect method
is  called  for.  in  1974,  when  scherk  and  schwarz  proposed  that  one  particular  pattern  of  string
vibration was the graviton particle, they were able to exploit such an indirect approach and thereby
predict the tension on the strings of string theory. their calculations revealed that the strength of the
force transmitted by the proposed graviton pattern of string vibration is inversely proportional to the
string's tension. and since the graviton is supposed to transmit the gravitational force—a force that is
intrinsically quite feeble—they found that this implies a colossal tension of a thousand billion billion
billion billion (1039) tons, the so-called planck tension. fundamental strings are therefore extremely
stiff compared with more familiar examples. this has three important consequences.

three consequences of stiff strings

first, whereas the ends of a violin or a piano string are pinned down, ensuring that they have a fixed
length, no analogous constraining frame pins down the size of a fundamental string. instead, the huge
string tension causes the loops of string theory to contract to a minuscule size. detailed calculation
reveals that being under planck tension translates into a typical string having planck length—10-33
centimeters—as previously mentioned.8

second, because of the enormous tension, the typical energy of a vibrating loop in string theory
is extremely high. to understand this, we note that the greater the tension a string is under, the harder
it is to get it to vibrate. for instance, it's far easier to pluck a violin string and set it vibrating than it is
to pluck a piano string. two strings, therefore, that are under different tension and are vibrating in
precisely the same way will not have the same energy. the string with higher tension will have more
energy than the string with lower tension, since more energy must be exerted to set it in motion.

this alerts us to the fact that the energy of a vibrating string is determined by two things: the
precise manner in which it vibrates (more frantic patterns corresponding to higher energies) and the
tension of the string (higher tension corresponding to higher energy). at first, this description might
lead  you  to  think  that  by  taking  on  ever  gentler  vibrational  patterns—patterns  with  ever  smaller
amplitudes and fewer peaks and troughs—a string can embody less and less energy. but as we found
in chapter 4 in a different context, quantum mechanics tells us that this reasoning is not right. like all
vibrations or wavelike disturbances, quantum mechanics implies that they can exist only in discrete
units. roughly speaking, just as the money carried by a comrade in the warehouse is a whole number
multiple of the monetary denomination with which he or she is entrusted, the energy embodied in a
string vibrational pattern is a whole number multiple of a minimal energy denomination. in particular,
this  minimal  energy  denomination  is  proportional  to  the  tension  of  the  string  (and  it  is  also
proportional to the number of peaks and troughs in the particular vibrational pattern), while the whole
number multiple is determined by the amplitude of the vibrational pattern.

the  key  point  for  the  present  discussion  is  this:  since  the  minimal  energy  denominations  are
proportional  to  the  string's  tension,  and  since  this  tension  is  enormous,  the  fundamental  minimal
energies are, on the usual scales of elementary particle physics, similarly huge. they are multiples of
what is known as the planck energy. to get a sense of scale, if we translate the planck energy into a

mass using einstein's famous conversion formula e = mc2, they correspond to masses that are on the
order  of  ten  billion  billion  (1019)  times  that  of  a  proton.  this  gargantuan  mass—by  elementary
particle standards—is known as the planck mass; it's about equal to the mass of a grain of dust or a
collection of a million average bacteria. and so, the typical mass-equivalent of a vibrating loop in
string theory is generally some whole number (1, 2, 3,. . .) times the planck mass. physicists often
express this by saying that the "natural" or "typical" energy scale (and hence mass scale) of string
theory is the planck scale.

this raises a crucial question directly related to the goal of reproducing the particle properties
in tables 1.1 and 1.2: if the "natural" energy scale of string theory is some ten billion billion times
that of a proton, how can it possibly account for the far-lighter particles—electrons, quarks, photons,
and so on—making up the world around us?

the answer, once again, comes from quantum mechanics. the uncertainty principle ensures that
nothing is ever perfectly at rest. all objects undergo quantum jitter, for if they didn't we would know
where  they  were  and  how  fast  they  were  moving  with  complete  precision,  in  violation  of
heisenberg's dictum. this holds true for the loops in string theory as well; no matter how placid a
string appears it will always experience some amount of quantum vibration. the remarkable thing, as
originally worked out in the 1970s, is that there can be energy cancellations between these quantum
jitters and the more intuitive kind of string vibrations discussed above and illustrated in figures 6.2
and  6.3.  in  effect,  through  the  weirdness  of  quantum  mechanics,  the  energy  associated  with  the
quantum jitters of a string is negative, and this reduces the overall energy content of a vibrating string
by an amount that is roughly equal to planck energy. this means that the lowest-energy vibrational
string patterns, whose energies we would naively expect to be about equal to the planck energy(i.e., 1
times the planck energy), are largely canceled, thereby yielding relatively low net-energy vibrations
—energies whose corresponding mass-equivalents are in the neighborhood of the matter and force
particle masses shown in tables 1.1 and 1.2. it is these lowest energy vibrational patterns, therefore,
that  should  provide  contact  between  the  theoretical  description  of  strings  and  the  experimentally
accessible world of particle physics. as an important example, scherk and schwarz found that for the
vibrational  pattern  whose  properties  make  it  a  candidate  for  the  graviton  messenger  particle,  the
energy  cancellations  are perfect,  resulting  in  a  zero-mass  gravitational-force  particle.  this  is
precisely what is expected for the graviton; the gravitational force is transmitted at light speed and
only massless particles travel at this maximal velocity. but low-energy vibrational combinations are
very  much  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule.  the  more  typical  vibrating  fundamental  string
corresponds to a particle whose mass is billions upon billions times greater than that of the proton.

this  tells  us  that  the  comparatively  light  fundamental  particles  of  tables  1.1  and  1.2  should
arise, in a sense, from the fine mist above the roaring ocean of energetic strings. even a particle as
heavy as the top quark, with a mass about 189 times that of the proton, can arise from a vibrating
string  only  if  the  string's  enormous  characteristic  planck-scale  energy  is  canceled  by  the  jitters  of
quantum uncertainty to better than one part in a hundred million billion. it's as if you were playing the
price is right and bob barker gives you ten billion billion dollars and challenges you to purchase
products that will cost—cancel, so to speak—all but 189 of the dollars, not a dollar more or less.
coming up with such an enormous yet precise expenditure, without being privy to the exact prices of
the  individual  items,  would  severely  tax  the  acumen  of  even  the  world's  most  expert  shoppers.  in
string  theory,  where  the  currency  is  energy  as  opposed  to  money,  approximate  calculations  have
conclusively shown that analogous energy cancellations certainly can occur, but for reasons that will
become increasingly clear in subsequent chapters, verifying the cancellations to such a high level of

precision is generally beyond our theoretical ken at present. even so, as indicated before, we shall
see that many other properties of string theory that are less sensitive to these finest of details can be
extracted and understood with confidence.

this takes us to the third consequence of the enormous value of the string tension. strings can
execute an infinite number of different vibrational patterns. for instance, in figure 6.2 we showed the
beginnings of a never-ending sequence of possibilities characterized by an ever greater number of
peaks  and  troughs.  doesn't  this  mean  that  there  would  have  to  be  a  corresponding  never-ending
sequence of elementary particles, seemingly in conflict with the experimental situation summarized in
tables 1.1 and 1.2?

the answer is yes: if string theory is right, each of the infinitely many resonant patterns of string
vibration should correspond to an elementary particle. an essential point, however, is that the high
string tension ensures that all but a few of these vibrational patterns will correspond to extremely
heavy particles (the few being the lowest-energy vibrations that have near-perfect cancellations with
quantum string jitters). and again, the term "heavy" here means many times heavier than the planck
mass. as our most powerful particle accelerators can reach energies only on the order of a thousand
times the proton mass, less than a millionth of a billionth of the planck energy, we are very far from
being able to search in the laboratory for any of these new particles predicted by string theory.

there are more indirect approaches by which we could search for them, though. for instance,
the  energies  involved  at  the  birth  of  the  universe  would  have  been  high  enough  to  produce  these
particles copiously. in general one would not expect them to survive to the present day, as such super-
heavy particles are usually unstable, relinquishing their enormous mass by decaying into a cascade of
ever  lighter  particles,  ending  with  the  familiar,  relatively  light  particles  in  the  world  around  us.
however, it is possible that such a super-heavy vibrational string state—a relic from the big bang—
did survive to the present. finding such particles, as we discuss more fully in chapter 9, would be a
monumental discovery, to say the least.

gravity and quantum mechanics in string theory

the unified framework that string theory presents is compelling. but its real attraction is the ability to
ameliorate  the  hostilities  between  the  gravitational  force  and  quantum  mechanics.  recall  that  the
problem in merging general relativity and quantum mechanics turns up when the central tenet of the
former—that  space  and  time  constitute  a  smoothly  curving  geometrical  structure—confronts  the
essential feature of the latter—that everything in the universe, including the fabric of space and time,
undergoes  quantum  fluctuations  that  become  increasingly  turbulent  when  probed  on  smaller  and
smaller distance scales. on sub-planck-scale distances, the quantum undulations are so violent that
they  destroy  the  notion  of  a  smoothly  curving  geometrical  space;  this  means  that  general  relativity
breaks down.

string  theory  softens  the  violent  quantum  undulations  by  "smearing"  out  the  short-distance
properties of space. there is a rough and a more precise answer to the question of what this really
means and how it resolves the conflict. we discuss each in turn.

the rough answer

although  it  sounds  unsophisticated,  one  way  that  we  learn  about  the  structure  of  an  object  is  by
hurling other things at it and observing the precise way in which they are deflected. we are able to
see  things,  for  example,  because  our  eyes  collect  and  our  brains  decode  information  carried  by
photons  as  they  bounce  off  of  objects  being  viewed.  particle  accelerators  are  based  on  the  same
principle: they hurl bits of matter such as electrons and protons at each other as well as at other
targets, and elaborate detectors analyze the resulting spray of debris to determine the architecture of
the objects involved.

as a general rule, the size of the probe particle that we use sets a lower limit to the length scale
to which we are sensitive. to get a feel for what this important statement means, imagine that slim
and jim decide to get some culture by enrolling in a drawing class. as the semester progresses, jim
becomes increasingly irritated by slim's growing proficiency as an artist and challenges him to an
unusual contest. he proposes that they each take a peach pit, secure it in a vise, and draw their most
accurate "still life" renditions. the unusual feature of jim's challenge is that neither he nor slim will
be  allowed  to  look  at  the  peach  pits.  instead,  each  is  allowed  to  learn  about  the  size,  shape,  and
features of his peach pit only by shooting things (other than photons!) at the pit and observing how
they are deflected, as illustrated in figure 6.4. unbeknownst to slim, jim fills slim's "shooter" with
marbles (as in figure 6.4(a)) but fills his own shooter with far smaller five-millimeter plastic pellets
(as in figure 6.4(b)). they both turn on their shooters, and the competition begins.

after a while, the best drawing slim can come up with is that in figure 6.4(a). by observing the
trajectories of the deflected marbles he was able to learn that the pit is a small, hard-surfaced mass.
but that's all he could learn. marbles are just too large to be sensitive to the finer corrugated structure
of the peach pit. when slim takes a look at jim's drawing (figure 6.4(b)), he is surprised to see that
he  has  been  outdone. a  momentary  glance  at  jim's  shooter,  though,  reveals  the  trick:  the  smaller
probe particles used by jim are fine enough to have their angle of deflection affected by some of the
largest features adorning the pit's surface. and so, by shooting many five-millimeter pellets at the pit
and observing their deflected trajectories, jim was able to draw a more detailed image. slim, not to
be  outdone,  goes  back  to  his  shooter,  fills  it  with  even  smaller  probe  particles—half-millimeter
pellets—that are tiny enough to enter and hence be deflected by the finest corrugations on the pit's
surface.  by  observing  how  these  impinging  probe  particles  are  deflected,  he  is  able  to  draw  the
winning rendition shown in figure 6.4(c).

the  lesson  taught  by  this  little  competition  is  clear:  useful  probe  particles  cannot  be
substantially larger than the physical features being examined; otherwise, they will be insensitive to
the structures of interest.

figure  6.4  a  peach  pit  is  secured  in  a  vise  and  it  is  drawn  solely  by  observing  how  things
—"probes"—thrown  at  it  are  deflected.  by  using  ever  smaller  probes—(a)  marbles,  (b)  five-
millimeter pellets, (c) half-millimeter pellets—ever more detailed renditions can be drawn.

the  same  reasoning  holds,  of  course,  if  one  wants  to  probe  the  pit  even  more  deeply  to
determine  its  atomic  and  subatomic  structure.  half-millimeter  pellets  will  not  provide  any  useful
information; they are clearly too big to have any sensitivity to structure on atomic scales. this is why
particle  accelerators  use  protons  or  electrons  as  probes,  since  their  small  size  makes  them  much
better suited to the task. on subatomic scales, where quantum concepts replace classical reasoning,
the  most  appropriate  measure  of  a  particle's  probing  sensitivity  is  its  quantum  wavelength,  which
indicates the window of uncertainty in its position. this fact reflects our discussion of heisenberg's
uncertainty principle in chapter 4, in which we found that the margin of error incurred when using a
point  particle  as  a  probe  (we  focused  on  photon  probes  but  the  discussion  applies  to  all  other
particles) is about equal to the probe particle's quantum wave-length. in somewhat looser language,
the probing sensitivity of a point particle is smeared out by the jitteriness of quantum mechanics, in
much the same way that the precision of a surgeon's scalpel is compromised if he or she has hands
that  shake.  but  recall  that  in  chapter  4  we  also  noted  the  important  fact  that  a  particle's  quantum
wavelength is inversely proportional to its momentum, which, roughly speaking, is its energy. and so,
by increasing a point particle's energy, its quantum wavelength can be made shorter and shorter—
quantum smearing can be decreased further and further—and hence we can use it to probe ever finer
physical  structures.  intuitively,  higher-energy  particles  have  greater  penetrating  power  and  are
therefore able to probe more minute features.

in this regard, the distinction between point particles and strands of string becomes manifest.
just as was the case for plastic pellets probing the surface features of a peach pit, the string's inherent
spatial extent prevents it from probing the structure of anything substantially smaller than its own size
—in  this  case  structures  arising  on  length  scales  shorter  than  the  planck  length.  somewhat  more
precisely, in 1988 david gross, then of princeton university, and his student paul mende showed that
when quantum mechanics is taken into account, continually increasing the energy of a string does not
continually increase its ability to probe finer structures, in direct contrast with what happens for a
point particle. they found that when the energy of a string is increased, it is at first able to probe
shorter-scale structures, just like an energetic point particle. but when its energy is increased beyond
the value required for probing structures on the scale of the planck length, the additional energy does
not sharpen the string probe. rather, the energy causes the string to grow in size, thereby diminishing
its short-distance sensitivity. in fact, although the size of a typical string is the planck length, if we
pumped enough energy into a string—an amount of energy beyond our wildest imaginings but one that
would likely have been attained by the big bang—we could cause it to grow to a macroscopic size, a
clumsy probe of the microcosmos indeed! it's as if a string, unlike a point particle, has two sources of
smearing: quantum jitters, as for a point particle, and also its own inherent spatial extent. increasing a
string's energy decreases the smearing from the first source but ultimately increases the smearing from
the second. the upshot is that no matter how hard you try, the extended nature of a string prevents you
from using it to probe phenomena on sub-planck-length distances.

but the whole conflict between general relativity and quantum mechanics arises from the sub-
planck-length properties of the spatial fabric. if the elementary constituent of the universe cannot
probe sub-planck-scale distances, then neither it nor anything made from it can be affected by the

supposedly disastrous short-distance quantum undulations. this is similar to what happens as we
draw our hand across a highly polished granite surface. although at a microscopic level the granite is
discrete,  grainy,  and  bumpy,  our  fingers  are  unable  to  detect  these  short-scale  variations  and  the
surface  feels  perfectly  smooth.  our  stumpy,  extended  fingers  "smear"  out  the  microscopic
discreteness.  similarly,  since  the  string  has  spatial  extent,  it  also  has  limits  on  its  short-distance
sensitivity. it cannot detect variations on sub-planck-distance scales. like our fingers on granite, the
string  smears  out  the  jittery  ultramicroscopic  fluctuations  of  the  gravitational  field.  although  the
resulting  fluctuations  are  still  substantial,  this  smearing  smooths  them  out  just  enough  to  cure  the
incompatibility between general relativity and quantum mechanics. and, in particular, the pernicious
infinities (discussed in the preceding chapter) that arise in the point-particle approach to forming a
quantum theory of gravity are done away with by string theory.

an essential difference between the granite analogy and our real concern with the spatial fabric
is that there are ways in which the microscopic discreteness of the granite's surface can be exposed:
finer, more precise probes than our fingers can be used. an electron microscope has the ability to
resolve surface features to less than a millionth of a centimeter; this is sufficiently small to reveal the
numerous  surface  imperfections.  by  contrast,  in  string  theory  there  is  no  way  to  expose  the  sub-
planck-scale  "imperfections"  in  the  fabric  of  space.  in  a  universe  governed  by  the  laws  of  string
theory, the conventional notion that we can always dissect nature on ever smaller distances, without
limit, is not true. there is a limit, and it comes into play before we encounter the devastating quantum
foam of figure 5.1. therefore, in a sense that will be made more precise in later chapters, one can
even say that the supposed tempestuous sub-planckian quantum undulations do not exist. a positivist
would say that something exists only if it can—at least in principle—be probed and measured. since
the string is supposed to be the most elementary object in the universe and since it is too large to be
affected by the violent sub-planck-length undulations of the spatial fabric, these fluctuations cannot be
measured and hence, according to string theory, do not actually arise.

a sleight of hand?

this discussion may leave you feeling dissatisfied. instead of showing that string theory tames the
sub-planck-length quantum undulations of space, we seem to have used the string's nonzero size to
skirt the whole issue completely. have we actually solved anything? we have. the following two
points will serve to emphasize this.

first, what the preceding argument implies is that the supposedly problematic sub-planck-length
spatial fluctuations are an artifact of formulating general relativity and quantum mechanics in a point-
particle framework. in a sense, therefore, the central conflict of contemporary theoretical physics has
been a problem of our own making. because we previously envisioned all matter particles and all
force particles to be pointlike objects with literally no spatial extent, we were obligated to consider
properties of the universe on arbitrarily short distance scales. and on the tiniest of distances we ran
into seemingly insurmountable problems. string theory tells us that we encountered these problems
only because we did not understand the true rules of the game; the new rules tell us that there is a limit
to how finely we can probe the universe—and, in a real sense, a limit to how finely our conventional
notion of distance can even be applied to the ultramicroscopic structure of the cosmos. the supposed
pernicious spatial fluctuations are now seen to have arisen in our theories because we were unaware
of  these  limits  and  were  thus  led  by  a  point-particle  approach  to  grossly  overstep  the  bounds  of

physical reality.

given  the  apparent  simplicity  of  this  solution  for  overcoming  the  problem  between  general
relativity and quantum mechanics, you might wonder why it took so long for someone to suggest that
the point-particle description is merely an idealization and that in the real world elementary particles
do have some spatial extent. this takes us to our second point. long ago, some of the greatest minds
in  theoretical  physics,  such  as  pauli,  heisenberg,  dirac,  and  feynman, did  suggest  that  nature's
constituents might not actually be points but rather small undulating "blobs" or "nuggets." they and
others found, however, that it is very hard to construct a theory, whose fundamental constituent is not
a  point  particle,  that  is  nonetheless  consistent  with  the  most  basic  of  physical  principles  such  as
conservation  of  quantum-mechanical  probability  (so  that  physical  objects  do  not  suddenly  vanish
from  the  universe,  without  a  trace)  and  the  impossibility  of  faster-than-light-speed  transmission  of
information. from a variety of perspectives, their research showed time and again that one or both of
these  principles  were  violated  when  the  point-particle  paradigm  was  discarded.  for  a  long  time,
therefore,  it  seemed  impossible  to  find  a  sensible  quantum  theory  based  on  anything  but  point
particles.  the  truly  impressive  feature  of  string  theory  is  that  more  than  twenty  years  of  exacting
research has shown that although certain features are unfamiliar, string theory does respect all of the
requisite properties inherent in any sensible physical theory. and furthermore, through its graviton
pattern of vibration, string theory is a quantum theory containing gravity.

the more precise answer

the rough answer captures the essence of why string theory prevails where previous point-particle
theories failed. and so, if you like, you can go on to the next section without losing the logical flow of
our  discussion.  but  having  developed  the  essential  ideas  of  special  relativity  in  chapter  2,  we
already have the necessary tools for describing more accurately how string theory calms the violent
quantum jitters.

in the more precise answer, we rely upon the same core idea as in the rough answer, but we
express it directly at the level of strings. we do this by comparing, in some detail, point-particle and
string probes. we will see how the extended nature of the string smears out the information that would
be obtainable by point-particle probes, and therefore, again, how it happily does away with the ultra-
short-distance behavior responsible for the central dilemma of contemporary physics.

we first consider the way in which point particles would interact, if they were actually to exist,
and hence how they could be used as physical probes. the most basic interaction is between two
point particles moving on a collision course so that their trajectories will intersect, as in figure 6.5.
if these particles were billiard balls they would collide, and each would be deflected onto a new
trajectory.  point-particle  quantum  field  theory  shows  that  essentially  the  same  thing  happens  when
elementary particles collide—they scatter off one another and continue on deflected trajectories—but
the details are a little different.

figure 6.5 two particles interact—they "slam together"—and cause the path of each to be deflected.

for  concreteness  and  simplicity,  imagine  that  one  of  the  two  particles  is  an  electron  and  the
other is its antiparticle, the positron. when matter and antimatter collide, they can annihilate in a flash
of pure energy, producing, for example, a photon.9 to distinguish the ensuing trajectory of the photon
from the previous trajectories of the electron and positron, we follow a traditional physics convention
and draw it with a wiggly line. the photon will typically travel for a bit and then release the energy
derived  from  the  initial  electron-positron  pair  by  producing  another  electron-positron  pair  with
trajectories as indicated on the far right of figure 6.6. in the end, two particles are fired at each other,
they interact through the electromagnetic force, and finally they emerge on deflected trajectories, a
sequence of events that bears some similarity to our description of colliding billiard balls.

figure  6.6  in  quantum  field  theory,  a  particle  and  its  antiparticle  can  momentarily  annihilate  one
another,  producing  a  photon.  subsequently,  this  photon  can  give  rise  to  another  particle  and
antiparticle traveling along different trajectories.

we are concerned with the details of the interaction—specifically, the point where the initial
electron and positron annihilate and produce the photon. the central fact, as will become apparent, is
that there is an unambiguous, completely identifiable time and place where this happens: it is marked
in figure 6.6.

how  does  this  description  change  if,  when  we  closely  examine  the  objects  we  thought  were
zero-dimensional points, they turn out to be one-dimensional strings? the basic process of interaction
is the same, but now the objects on a collision course are oscillating loops, as shown in figure 6.7. if
these loops are vibrating in just the right resonance patterns, they will correspond to an electron and a
positron on collision course, just as in figure 6.6. only when examined at the most minute distance
scales, far smaller than anything our present technology can access, is their true stringlike character
apparent. as in the point-particle case, the two strings collide and again annihilate each other in a
flash. the flash, a photon, is itself a string in a particular vibrational pattern. thus, the two incoming
strings interact by merging together and producing a third string, as shown in figure 6.7. just as in our
point-particle description, this string travels a bit, and then releases the energy derived from the two
initial  strings  by  dissociating  into  two  strings  that  travel  onward.  again,  from  any  but  the  most
microscopic perspective, this will look just like the point-particle interaction of figure 6.6.

figure 6.7 (a) two strings on a collision course can merge into a third string, which subsequently can
split apart into two strings travelling along deflected trajectories. (b) the same process as shown in
(a), emphasizing string motion. (c) a "time-lapse photograph" of two interacting strings sweeping out
a "world-sheet."

there is, however, a crucial difference between the two descriptions. we emphasized that the
point-particle  interaction  occurs  at  an  identifiable  point  in  space  and  time,  a  location  that  all
observers can agree on. as we shall now see, this is not true for interactions between strings. we
will show this by comparing how george and gracie, two observers in relative motion as in chapter
2, would describe the interaction. we will see that they do not agree on where and when the two
strings touch for the first time.

to do so, imagine that we view the interaction between two strings with a camera whose shutter
is kept open so that the whole history of the process is captured on one piece of film.10 we show the
result—known as a string world-sheet—in figure 6.7(c). by "slicing" the world-sheet into parallel
pieces—much as one slices a loaf of bread—the moment-by-moment history of the string interaction
can be recovered. we show an example of this slicing in figure 6.8. specifically, in figure 6.8(a) we
show george, intently focused on the two incoming strings, together with an attached plane that slices
through all events in space that occur at the same time, according to his perspective. as we have
done often in previous chapters, we have suppressed one spatial dimension in this diagram for visual
clarity. in reality, of course, there is a three-dimensional array of events that occur at the same time
according to any observer. figures 6.8(b) and 6.8(c) give a couple of snapshots at subsequent times
—subsequent "slices" of the world-sheet—showing how george sees the two strings approach each
other. of central importance, in figure 6.8(c) we show the instant in time, according to george, when
the two strings first touch and merge together, producing the third string.

let's now do the same for gracie. as discussed in chapter 2, the relative motion of george and
gracie  implies  that  they  do  not  agree  on  what  events  occur  at  the  same  time.  from  gracie's
perspective the events in space that occur simultaneously lie on a different plane, as shown in figure
6.9. that is, from gracie's perspective, the world-sheet of figure 6.7(c) must be "sliced" into pieces
at a different angle in order to reveal the moment-by-moment progression of the interaction.

figure 6.8 the two incoming strings from george's perspective at three consecutive moments in time.
in  (a)  and  (b)  the  strings  are  getting  closer  together;  at  (c)  they  touch  for  the  first  time,  from  his
viewpoint.

in figures 6.9(b) and 6.9(c) we show subsequent moments in time, now according to gracie,

including the moment when she sees the two incoming strings touch and produce the third string.

by comparing figures 6.8(c) and 6.9(c), as we do in figure 6.10, we see that george and gracie
do not agree on when and where the two initial strings first touch—where they interact. the string,
being an extended object, ensures that there is no unambiguous location in space or moment in time
when the strings first interact—rather, it depends upon the state of motion of the observer.

if we apply exactly the same reasoning to the interaction of point particles, as summarized in
figure 6.11, we recover the conclusion stated earlier—there is a definite point in space and moment
in time when the point particles interact. point particles cram all of their interaction into a definite
point.  when  the  force  involved  in  an  interaction  is  the  gravitational  force—that  is,  when  the
messenger particle involved in the interaction is the graviton instead of the photon—this complete
packing of the force's punch into a single point leads to disastrous results, such as the infinite answers
we alluded to earlier. strings, by contrast, "smear" out the place where interactions occur. because
different observers perceive that the interaction takes place at various locations along the left part of
the  surface  of  figure  6.10,  in  a  real  sense  this  means  that  the  interaction  location  is  smeared  out
among all of them. this spreads out the force's punch and, in the case of the gravitational force, this
smearing  significantly  dilutes  its  ultramicroscopic  properties—so  much  so  that  calculations  yield
well-behaved finite answers in place of the previous infinities. this is a more precise version of the
smearing encountered in the rough answer of the last section. and once again, this smearing results in
a smoothing of the ultramicroscopic jitteriness of space as sub-planck-length distances are blurred
together.

figure 6.9 the two incoming strings from gracie's perspective at three consecutive moments in time.
in  (a)  and  (b)  the  strings  are  getting  closer  together;  at  (c)  they  touch  for  the  first  time,  from  her
viewpoint.

figure 6.10 george and gracie do not agree on the location of the interaction.

like  viewing  the  world  through  glasses  that  are  too  weak  or  too  strong,  fine  sub-planckian
details that would be accessible to a point-particle probe are smeared together by string theory and
rendered harmless. and unlike the case with poor eyesight, if string theory is the ultimate description
of the universe, there is no corrective lens to bring the supposed sub-planck-scale fluctuations into
sharp focus. the incompatibility of general relativity and quantum mechanics—which would become
apparent only on sub-planck-scale distances—is avoided in a universe that has a lower limit on the
distances that can be accessed, or even said to exist, in the conventional sense. such is the universe
described  by  string  theory,  in  which  we  see  that  the  laws  of  the  large  and  the  small  can  be
harmoniously merged together as the supposed catastrophe arising on ultramicroscopic distances is
summarily done away with.

figure 6.11 observers in relative motion agree on when and where two point particles interact with
another.

beyond strings?

strings  are  special  for  two  reasons.  first,  even  though  they  are  spatially  extended  they  can  be
described  consistently  in  the  framework  of  quantum  mechanics.  second,  among  the  resonant
vibrational patterns there is one that has the exact properties of the graviton, thus ensuring that the
gravitational  force  is  an  intrinsic  part  of  its  structure.  but  just  as  string  theory  shows  that  the
conventional notion of zero-dimensional point particles appears to be a mathematical idealization that
is not realized in the real world, might it also be the case that an infinitely thin one-dimensional strand
is similarly a mathematical idealization? might it actually be the case that strings have some thickness
—like the surface of a two-dimensional bicycle-tire inner tube or, even more realistically, like a thin
three-dimensional doughnut? the seemingly insurmountable difficulties found by heisenberg, dirac,
and  others  in  their  attempts  to  construct  a  quantum  theory  of  three-dimensional  nuggets  have
repeatedly stymied researchers following this natural chain of reasoning.

quite unexpectedly, though, during the mid-1990s, string theorists realized, through indirect and
rather  shrewd  reasoning,  that  such  higher-dimensional  fundamental  objects  actually  do  play  an
important and subtle role in string theory itself. researchers have gradually realized that string theory
i s not  a  theory  that  contains  only  strings. a  crucial  observation,  central  to  the  second  superstring
revolution initiated by witten and others in 1995, is that string theory actually includes ingredients
with a variety of different dimensions: two-dimensional frisbee-like constituents, three-dimensional
blob-like constituents, and even more exotic possibilities to boot. these most recent realizations will
be taken up in chapters 12 and 13. for now we continue to follow the path of history and further
explore the striking new properties of a universe built out of one-dimensional strings instead of zero-
dimensional point-particles.

chapter 7

the "super" in superstrings

when the success of eddington's 1919 expedition to measure einstein's prediction of the bending of
starlight by the sun had been established, the dutch physicist hendrik lorentz sent einstein a telegram
informing him of the good news. as word of the telegram's confirmation of general relativity spread,
a student asked einstein about what he would have thought if eddington's experiment had not found
the predicted bending of starlight. einstein replied, "then i would have been sorry for the dear lord,
for the theory is correct."1 of course, had experiments truly failed to confirm einstein's predictions,
the  theory  would  not  be  correct  and  general  relativity  would  not  have  become  a  pillar  of  modern
physics. but what einstein meant is that general relativity describes gravity with such a deep inner
elegance, with such simple yet powerful ideas, that he found it hard to imagine that nature could pass
it by. general relativity, in einstein's view, was almost too beautiful to be wrong.

aesthetic  judgments  do  not  arbitrate  scientific  discourse,  however.  ultimately,  theories  are
judged  by  how  they  fare  when  faced  with  cold,  hard,  experimental  facts.  but  this  last  remark  is
subject to an immensely important qualification. while a theory is being constructed, its incomplete
state  of  development  often  prevents  its  detailed  experimental  consequences  from  being  assessed.
nevertheless, physicists must make choices and exercise judgments about the research direction in
which  to  take  their  partially  completed  theory.  some  of  these  decisions  are  dictated  by  internal
logical  consistency;  we  certainly  require  that  any  sensible  theory  avoid  logical  absurdities.  other
decisions  are  guided  by  a  sense  of  the  qualitative  experimental  implications  of  one  theoretical
construct  relative  to  another;  we  are  generally  not  interested  in  a  theory  if  it  has  no  capacity  to
resemble  anything  we  encounter  in  the  world  around  us.  but  it  is  certainly  the  case  that  some
decisions  made  by  theoretical  physicists  are  founded  upon  an  aesthetic  sense—a  sense  of  which
theories have an elegance and beauty of structure on par with the world we experience. of course,
nothing ensures that this strategy leads to truth. maybe, deep down, the universe has a less elegant
structure than our experiences have led us to believe, or maybe we will find that our current aesthetic
criteria need significant refining when applied in ever less familiar contexts. nevertheless, especially
as we enter an era in which our theories describe realms of the universe that are increasingly difficult
to  probe  experimentally,  physicists  do  rely  on  such  an  aesthetic  to  help  them  steer  clear  of  blind
alleys  and  dead-end  roads  that  they  might  otherwise  pursue.  so  far,  this  approach  has  provided  a
powerful and insightful guide.

in physics, as in art, symmetry is a key part of aesthetics. but unlike the case in art, symmetry in
physics has a very concrete and precise meaning. in fact, by diligently following this precise notion of
symmetry to its mathematical conclusion, physicists during the last few decades have found theories
in  which  matter  particles  and  messenger  particles  are  far  more  closely  intertwined  than  anyone
previously  thought  possible.  such  theories,  which  unite  not  only  the  forces  of  nature  but  also  the
material  constituents,  have  the  greatest  possible  symmetry  and  for  this  reason  have  been  called
supersymmetric. superstring theory, as we shall see, is both the progenitor and the pinnacle example

of a supersymmetric framework.

the nature of physical law

imagine a universe in which the laws of physics are as ephemeral as the tastes of fashion—changing
from year to year, from week to week, or even from moment to moment. in such a world, assuming
that the changes do not disrupt basic life processes, you would never experience a dull moment, to
say the least. the simplest acts would be an adventure, since random variations would prevent you or
anyone else from using past experience to predict anything about future outcomes.

such a universe is a physicist's nightmare. physicists—and most everyone else as well—rely
crucially upon the stability of the universe: the laws that are true today were true yesterday and will
still be true tomorrow (even if we have not been clever enough to have figured them all out). after
all, what meaning can we give to the term "law" if it can abruptly change? this does not mean that the
universe is static; the universe certainly changes in innumerable ways from each moment to the next.
rather,  it  means  that  the  laws  governing  such  evolution  are  fixed  and  unchanging. you  might  ask
whether we really know this to be true. in fact, we don't. but our success in describing numerous
features of the universe, from a brief moment after the big bang right through to the present, assures us
that  if  the  laws  are  changing  they  must  be  doing  so  very  slowly.  the  simplest  assumption  that  is
consistent with all that we know is that the laws are fixed.

now  imagine  a  universe  in  which  the  laws  of  physics  are  as  parochial  as  local  culture—
changing unpredictably from place to place and defiantly resisting any outside influence to conform.
like  the  adventures  of  gulliver,  travels  in  such  a  world  would  expose  you  to  an  enormously  rich
array of unpredictable experiences. but from a physicist's perspective, this is yet another nightmare.
it's hard enough, for instance, to live with the fact that laws that are valid in one country—or even one
state—may not be valid in another. but imagine what things would be like if the laws of nature were
as  varied.  in  such  a  world  experiments  carried  out  in  one  locale  would  have  no  bearing  on  the
physical laws relevant somewhere else. instead, physicists would have to redo experiments over and
over  again  in  different  locations  to  probe  the  local  laws  of  nature  that  hold  in  each.  thankfully,
everything we know points toward the laws of physics being the same everywhere. all experiments
the world over converge on the same set of underlying physical explanations. moreover, our ability to
explain  a  vast  number  of  astrophysical  observations  of  far-flung  regions  of  the  cosmos  using  one,
fixed  set  of  physical  principles  leads  us  to  believe  that  the  same  laws do  hold  true  everywhere.
having  never  traveled  to  the  opposite  end  of  the  universe,  we  can't  definitively  rule  out  the
possibility that a whole new kind of physics prevails elsewhere, but everything points to the contrary.
again, this does not mean that the universe looks the same—or has the same detailed properties
—in different locations. an astronaut jumping on a pogo stick on the moon can do all sorts of things
that are impossible to do on earth. but we recognize that the difference arises because the moon is far
less massive than the earth; it does not mean that the law of gravity is somehow changing from place
to place. newton's, or more precisely, einstein's, law of gravity is the same on earth as it is on the
moon.  the  difference  in  the  astronaut's  experience  is  one  of  change  in  environmental  detail,  not
variation of physical law.

physicists describe these two properties of physical laws—that they do not depend on when or
where you use them—as symmetries of nature. by this usage physicists mean that nature treats every
moment in time and every location in space identically—symmetrically—by ensuring that the same

fundamental  laws  are  in  operation.  much  in  the  same  manner  that  they  affect  art  and  music,  such
symmetries are deeply satisfying; they highlight an order and a coherence in the workings of nature.
the elegance of rich, complex, and diverse phenomena emerging from a simple set of universal laws
is at least part of what physicists mean when they invoke the term "beautiful."

in  our  discussions  of  the  special  and  general  theories  of  relativity,  we  came  upon  yet  other
symmetries  of  nature.  recall  that  the  principle  of  relativity,  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  special
relativity, tells us that all physical laws must be the same regardless of the constant-velocity relative
motion that individual observers might experience. this is a symmetry because it means that nature
treats all such observers identically—symmetrically. each such observer is justified in considering
himself or herself to be at rest. again, it's not that observers in relative motion will make identical
observations; as we have seen earlier, there are all sorts of stunning differences in their observations.
instead, like the disparate experiences of the pogo-stick enthusiast on the earth and on the moon, the
differences in observations reflect environmental details—the observers are in relative motion—even
though their observations are governed by identical laws.

through  the  equivalence  principle  of  general  relativity,  einstein  significantly  extended  this
symmetry by showing that the laws of physics are actually identical for all observers, even if they are
undergoing complicated accelerated motion. recall that einstein accomplished this by realizing that
an accelerated observer is also perfectly justified in declaring himself or herself to be at rest, and in
claiming that the force he or she feels is due to a gravitational field. once gravity is included in the
framework, all possible observational vantage points are on a completely equal footing. beyond the
intrinsic aesthetic appeal of this egalitarian treatment of all motion, we have seen that these symmetry
principles played a pivotal role in the stunning conclusions regarding gravity that einstein found.

are there any other symmetry principles having to do with space, time, and motion that the laws
of nature should respect? if you think about this you might come up with one more possibility. the
laws  of  physics  should  not  care  about  the angle  from  which  you  make  your  observations.  for
instance, if you perform some experiment and then decide to rotate all of your equipment and do the
experiment again, the same laws should apply. this is known as rotational symmetry, and it means
that the laws of physics treat all possible orientations on equal footing. it is a symmetry principle that
is on par with the previous ones discussed.

are there others? have we overlooked any symmetries? you might suggest the gauge symmetries
associated  with  the  nongravitational  forces,  as  discussed  in  chapter  5.  these  are  certainly
symmetries of nature, but they are of a more abstract sort; our focus here is on symmetries that have a
direct link to space, time, or motion. with this stipulation, it's now likely that you can't think of any
other  possibilities.  in  fact,  in  1967  physicists  sidney  coleman  and  jeffrey  mandula  were  able  to
prove that no other symmetries associated with space, time, or motion could be combined with those
just discussed and result in a theory bearing any resemblance to our world.

subsequently,  though,  close  examination  of  this  theorem,  based  on  insights  of  a  number  of
physicists revealed precisely one subtle loophole: the coleman-mandula result did not exploit fully
symmetries sensitive to something known as spin.

an elementary particle such as an electron can orbit an atomic nucleus in somewhat the same way that
the  earth  orbits  the  sun.  but,  in  the  traditional  point-particle  description  of  an  electron,  it  would

spin

appear that there is no analog of the earth's spinning around on its axis. when any object spins, points
on the axis of rotation itself—like the central point of a spinning frisbee—do not move. if something
is truly pointlike, though, it has no "other points" that lie off of any purported spin axis. and so it
would  appear  that  there  simply  is  no  notion  of  a  point  object  spinning.  many  years  ago,  such
reasoning fell prey to yet another quantum-mechanical surprise.

in 1925, the dutch physicists george uhlenbeck and samuel goudsmit realized that a wealth of
puzzling data having to do with properties of light emitted and absorbed by atoms could be explained
if electrons were assumed to have very particular magnetic properties. some hundred years earlier,
the  frenchman andre-marie ampère  had  shown  that  magnetism  arises  from  the  motion  of  electric
charge. uhlenbeck and goudsmit followed this lead and found that only one specific sort of electron
motion could give rise to the magnetic properties suggested by the data: rotational motion—that is,
spin. contrary to classical expectations, uhlenbeck and goudsmit proclaimed that, somewhat like the
earth, electrons both revolve and rotate.

did uhlenbeck and goudsmit literally mean that the electron is spinning? yes and no. what their
work really showed is that there is a quantum-mechanical notion of spin that is somewhat akin to the
usual  image  but  inherently  quantum  mechanical  in  nature.  it's  one  of  those  properties  of  the
microscopic  world  that  brushes  up  against  classical  ideas  but  injects  an  experimentally  verified
quantum  twist.  for  instance,  picture  a  spinning  skater.  as  she  pulls  her  arms  in  she  spins  more
quickly; as she stretches out her arms she spins more slowly. and sooner or later, depending on how
vigorously she threw herself into the spin, she will slow down and stop. not so for the kind of spin
revealed by uhlenbeck and goudsmit. according to their work and subsequent studies, every electron
in  the  universe,  always  and  forever, spins  at  one  fixed  and  never  changing  rate.  the  spin  of  an
electron is not a transitory state of motion as for more familiar objects that, for some reason or other,
happen to be spinning. instead, the spin of an electron is an intrinsic property, much like its mass or
its electric charge. if an electron were not spinning, it would not be an electron.

with this background on the concept of spin, let's now turn to the role it plays in revealing the

although  early  work  focused  on  the  electron,  physicists  have  subsequently  shown  that  these
ideas about spin apply equally well to all of the matter particles that fill out the three families of
table 1.1. this is true down to the last detail: all of the matter particles (and their antimatter partners
as well) have spin equal to that of the electron. in the language of the trade, physicists say that matter
particles  all  have  "spin-1/2,"  where  the  value  1/2  is,  roughly  speaking,  a  quantum-mechanical
measure  of  how  quickly  the  particles  rotate.2  moreover,  physicists  have  shown  that  the
nongravitational force carriers—photons, weak gauge bosons, and gluons—also possess an intrinsic
spinning characteristic that turns out to be twice that of the matter particles. they all have "spin-1."

what  about  gravity?  well,  even  before  string  theory,  physicists  were  able  to  determine  what
spin the hypothesized graviton must have to be the transmitter of the gravitational force. the answer:
twice the spin of photons, weak gauge bosons, and gluons—i.e., "spin-2."

in the context of string theory, spin—just like mass and force charges—is associated with the
pattern of vibration that a string executes. as with point particles, it's a bit misleading to think of the
spin carried by a string as arising from its spinning literally around in space, but this image does give
a loose picture to have in mind. by the way, we can now clarify an important issue we encountered
earlier. in 1974, when scherk and schwarz proclaimed that string theory should be thought of as a
quantum theory incorporating the gravitational force, they did so because they had found that strings
necessarily  have  a  vibrational  pattern  in  their  repertoire  that  is massless  and  has  spin-2—the
hallmark features of the graviton. where there is a graviton there is also gravity.

loophole in the coleman-mandula result concerning the possible symmetries of nature, mentioned in
the preceding section.

supersymmetry and superpartners

as we have emphasized, the concept of spin, although superficially akin to the image of a spinning
top, differs in substantial ways that are rooted in quantum mechanics. its discovery in 1925 revealed
that  there  is  another  kind  of  rotational  motion  that  simply  would  not  exist  in  a  purely  classical
universe.

this suggests the following question: just as ordinary rotational motion allows for the symmetry
principle of rotational invariance ("physics treats all spatial orientations on an equal footing"), could
it be that the more subtle rotational motion associated with spin leads to another possible symmetry of
the  laws  of  nature?  by  1971  or  so,  physicists  showed  that  the  answer  to  this  question  was  yes.
although  the  full  story  is  quite  involved,  the  basic  idea  is  that  when  spin  is  considered,  there  is
precisely one more symmetry of the laws of nature that is mathematically possible. it is known as
supersymmetry.3

supersymmetry cannot be associated with a simple and intuitive change in observational vantage
point; shifts in time, in spatial location, in angular orientation, and in velocity of motion exhaust these
possibilities.  but  just  as  spin  is  "like  rotational  motion,  with  a  quantum-mechanical  twist,"
supersymmetry  can  be  associated  with  a  change  in  observational  vantage  point  in  a  "quantum-
mechanical extension of space and time." these quotes are especially important, as the last sentence
is  only  meant  to  give  a  rough  sense  of  where  supersymmetry  fits  into  the  larger  framework  of
symmetry  principles.4  nevertheless,  although  understanding  the  origin  of  supersymmetry  is  rather
subtle, we will focus on one of its primary implications—should the laws of nature incorporate its
principles—and this is far easier to grasp.

in  the  early  1970s,  physicists  realized  that  if  the  universe  is  supersymmetric,  the  particles  of
nature  must  come  in pairs  whose  respective  spins  differ  by  half  a  unit.  such  pairs  of  particles—
regardless of whether they are thought of as pointlike (as in the standard model) or as tiny vibrating
loops—are called superpartners. since matter particles have spin-1/2 while some of the messenger
particles  have  spin-1,  supersymmetry  appears  to  result  in  a  pairing—a  partnering—of  matter  and
force  particles.  as  such,  it  seems  like  a  wonderful  unifying  concept.  the  problem  comes  in  the
details.

by the mid-1970s, when physicists sought to incorporate supersymmetry into the standard model,
they found that none of the known particles—those of tables 1.1 and 1.2—could be superpartners of
one  another.  instead,  detailed  theoretical  analysis  showed  that  if  the  universe  incorporates
supersymmetry, then every known particle must have an as-yet-undiscovered superpartner particle,
whose  spin  is  half  a  unit  less  than  its  known  counterpart.  for  instance,  there  should  be  a  spin-0
partner  of  the  electron;  this  hypothetical  particle  has  been  named  the selectron  (a  contraction  of
supersymmetric-electron).  the  same  should  also  be  true  for  the  other  matter  particles,  with,  for
example, the hypothetical spin-0 superpartners of neutrinos and quarks being called sneutrinos and
squarks. similarly, the force particles should have spin-1/2 superpartners: for photons there should
be photinos, for the gluons there should be gluinos, for the w and z bosons there should be winos and
zinos.

on  closer  inspection,  then,  supersymmetry  seems  to  be  a  terribly  uneconomical  feature;  it

requires  a  whole  slew  of  additional  particles  that  wind  up  doubling  the  list  of  fundamental
ingredients. since none of the superpartner particles has ever been detected, you would be justified to
take rabi's remark from chapter 1 regarding the discovery of the muon one step further, declare that
"nobody ordered supersymmetry," and summarily reject this symmetry principle. for three reasons,
however,  many  physicists  believe  strongly  that  such  an  out-of-hand  dismissal  of  supersymmetry
would be quite premature. let's discuss these reasons.

the case for supersymmetry: prior to string theory

first, from an aesthetic standpoint, physicists find it hard to believe that nature would respect almost,
but not quite all of the symmetries that are mathematically possible. of course, it is possible that an
incomplete utilization of symmetry is what actually occurs, but it would be such a shame. it would be
as if bach, after developing numerous intertwining voices to fill out an ingenious pattern of musical
symmetry, left out the final, resolving measure.

second, even within the standard model, a theory that ignores gravity, thorny technical issues
that are associated with quantum processes are swiftly solved if the theory is supersymmetric. the
basic problem is that every distinct particle species makes its own contribution to the microscopic
quantum-mechanical  frenzy.  physicists  have  found  that  in  the  bath  of  this  frenzy,  certain  processes
involving particle interactions remain consistent only if numerical parameters in the standard model
are fine-tuned—to better than one part in a million billion—to cancel out the most pernicious quantum
effects. such precision is on par with adjusting the launch angle of a bullet fired from an enormously
powerful rifle, so that it hits a specified target on the moon with a margin of error no greater than the
thickness  of  an  amoeba.  although  numerical  adjustments  of  an  analogous  precision  can  be  made
within  the  standard  model,  many  physicists  are  quite  suspect  of  a  theory  that  is  so  delicately
constructed that it falls apart if a number on which it depends is changed in the fifteenth digit after the
decimal point.5

supersymmetry  changes  this  drastically  because bosons—particles  whose  spin  is  a  whole
number (named after the indian physicist satyendra bose)—and fermions—particles whose spin is
half  of  a  whole  (odd)  number  (named  after  the  italian  physicist  enrico  fermi)—tend  to  give
cancelling  quantum-mechanical  contributions.  like  opposite  ends  of  a  seesaw,  when  the  quantum
jitters  of  a  boson  are  positive,  those  of  a  fermion  tend  to  be  negative,  and  vice  versa.  since
supersymmetry ensures that bosons and fermions occur in pairs, substantial cancellations occur from
the outset—cancellations that significantly calm some of the frenzied quantum effects. it turns out that
the consistency of the supersymmetric standard model—the standard model augmented by all of the
superpartner particles—no longer relies upon the uncomfortably delicate numerical adjustments of the
ordinary standard model. although this is a highly technical issue, many particle physicists find that
this realization makes supersymmetry very attractive.

the third piece of circumstantial evidence for supersymmetry comes from the notion of grand
unification. one of the puzzling features of nature's four forces is the huge range in their intrinsic
strengths. the electromagnetic force has less than 1 percent of the strength of the strong force, the
weak  force  is  some  thousand  times  feebler  than  that,  and  the  gravitational  force  is  some  hundred
million billion billion billion (10-35) times weaker still. following the pathbreaking and ultimately
nobel  prize–winning  work  of  glashow,  salam,  and  weinberg  that  established  a  deep  connection
between the electromagnetic and weak forces (discussed in chapter 5), in 1974 glashow, together

with his harvard colleague howard georgi, suggested that an analogous connection might be forged
with the strong force. their work, which proposed a "grand unification" of three of the four forces,
differed in one essential way from that of the electroweak theory: whereas the electromagnetic and
weak forces crystallized out of a more symmetric union when the temperature of the universe dropped
to about a million billion degrees above absolute zero (1015 kelvin), georgi and glashow showed
that the union with the strong force would have been apparent only at a temperature some ten trillion
times higher—around ten billion billion billion degrees above absolute zero (1028 kelvin). from the
point of view of energy, this is about a million billion times the mass of the proton, or about four
orders of magnitude less than the planck mass. georgi and glashow boldly took theoretical physics
into  an  energy  realm  many  orders  of  magnitude  beyond  that  which  anyone  had  previously  dared
explore.

subsequent work at harvard by georgi, helen quinn, and weinberg in 1974 made the potential
unity of the nongravitational forces within the grand unified framework even more manifest. as their
contribution continues to play an important role in unifying the forces and in assessing the relevance
of supersymmetry to the natural world, let's spend a moment explaining it.

we are all aware that the electrical attraction between two oppositely charged particles or the
gravitational attraction between two massive bodies gets stronger as the distance between the objects
decreases.  these  are  simple  and  well-known  features  of  classical  physics.  there  is  a  surprise,
though, when we study the effect that quantum physics has on force strengths. why should quantum
mechanics  have  any  effect  at  all?  the  answer,  once  again,  lies  in  quantum  fluctuations.  when  we
examine the electric force field of an electron, for example, we are actually examining it through the
"mist" of momentary particle-antiparticle eruptions and annihilations that are occurring all through the
region  of  space  surrounding  it.  physicists  some  time  ago  realized  that  this  seething  mist  of
microscopic fluctuations obscures the full strength of the electron's force field, somewhat as a thin fog
partially obscures the beacon of a lighthouse. but notice that as we get closer to the electron, we will
have penetrated more of the cloaking particle-antiparticle mist and hence will be less subject to its
diminishing influence. this implies that the strength of an electron's electric field will increase as we
get closer to it.

physicists  distinguish  this  quantum-mechanical  increase  in  strength  as  we  get  closer  to  the
electron  from  that  known  in  classical  physics  by  saying  that  the intrinsic  strength  of  the
electromagnetic force increases on shorter distance scales. this reflects that the strength increases not
merely because we are closer to the electron but also because more of the electron's intrinsic electric
field  becomes  visible.  in  fact,  although  we  have  focused  on  the  electron,  this  discussion  applies
equally well to all electrically charged particles and is summarized by saying that quantum effects
drive the strength of the electromagnetic force to get larger when examined on shorter distance scales.
what about the other forces of the standard model? how do their intrinsic strengths vary with
distance?  in  1973,  gross  and  frank  wilczek  at  princeton,  and,  independently,  david  politzer  at
harvard,  studied  this  question  and  found  a  surprising  answer:  the  quantum  cloud  of  particle
eruptions and annihilations amplifies the strengths of the strong and weak forces. this implies that as
we examine them on shorter distances, we penetrate more of this seething cloud and hence are subject
to less of its amplification. and so, the strengths of these forces get weaker when they are probed on
shorter distances.

georgi,  quinn,  and  weinberg  took  this  realization  and  ran  with  it  to  a  remarkable  end.  they
showed that when these effects of the quantum frenzy are carefully accounted for, the net result is that
the strengths of all three nongravitational forces are driven together. whereas the strengths of these

forces are very different on scales accessible to current technology, georgi, quinn, and weinberg
argued that this difference is actually due to the different effect that the haze of microscopic quantum
activity has on each force. their calculations showed that if this haze is penetrated by examining the
forces not on everyday scales but as they act on distances of about a hundredth of a billionth of a
billionth of a billionth (10-29) of a centimeter (a mere factor of ten thousand larger than the planck
length), the three nongravitational force strengths appear to become equal.

although far removed from the realm of common experience, the high energy necessary to be
sensitive  to  such  small  distances  was  characteristic  of  the  roiling,  hot  early  universe  when  it  was
about  a  thousandth  of  a  trillionth  of  a  trillionth  of  a  trillionth  (10-39)  of  a  second  old—when  its
temperature  was  on  the  order  of  1028  kelvin  mentioned  earlier.  in  somewhat  the  same  way  that  a
collection  of  disparate  ingredients—pieces  of  metal,  wood,  rocks,  minerals,  and  so  on—all  melt
together and become a uniform, homogeneous plasma when heated to sufficiently high temperature,
these theoretical works suggested that the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces all merge into one
grand force at such immense temperatures. this is shown schematically in figure 7.1.6

although we do not have the technology to probe such minute distance scales or to produce such
scorching temperatures, since 1974 experimentalists have significantly refined the measured strengths
of the three nongravitational forces under everyday conditions. these data—the starting points for the
three  force-strength  curves  in  figure  7.1—are  the  input  data  for  the  quantum-mechanical
extrapolations of georgi, quinn, and weinberg. in 1991, ugo amaldi of cern, wim de boer and
hermann  fürstenau  of  the  university  of  karlsruhe,  germany,  recalculated  the  georgi,  quinn,  and
weinberg extrapolations making use of these experimental refinements and showed two significant
things.  first,  the  strengths  of  the  three  nongravitational  forces almost  agree,  but  not  quite  at  tiny
distance scales (equivalently, high energy/high temperature) as shown in figure 7.2. second, this tiny
but undeniable discrepancy in their strengths vanishes if supersymmetry is incorporated. the reason
is  that  the  new  superpartner  particles  required  by  supersymmetry  contribute  additional  quantum
fluctuations, and these fluctuations are just right to nudge the strengths of the forces to converge with
one another.

figure 7.1 the strengths of the three nongravitational forces as they operate on ever shorter distance
scales—equivalently, as they act on ever higher energy processes.

to many physicists, it is extremely difficult to believe that nature would choose the forces so
that  they almost, but not quite, have strengths that microscopically unify—microscopically become
equal.  it's  like  putting  together  a  jigsaw  puzzle  in  which  the  final  piece  is  slightly  misshapen  and

won't cleanly fit into its appointed position. supersymmetry deftly refines its shape so that all pieces
firmly lock into place.

figure 7.2 a refinement of the calculation of force strengths reveals that without supersymmetry they
almost, but not quite, meet.

another aspect of this latter realization is that it provides a possible answer to the question, why
haven't  we  discovered  any  of  the  superpartner  particles?  the  calculations  that  lead  to  the
convergence of the force strengths, as well as other considerations studied by a number of physicists,
indicate  that  the  superpartner  particles  must  be  a  good  deal  heavier  than  the  known  particles.
although no definitive predictions can be made, studies show that the superpartner particles might be
a  thousand  times  as  massive  as  a  proton,  if  not  heavier. as  even  our  state-of-the-art  accelerators
cannot quite reach such energies, this provides an explanation for why these particles have not, as yet,
been  discovered.  in  chapter  9,  we  will  return  to  a  discussion  of  the  experimental  prospects  for
determining in the near future whether supersymmetry truly is a property of our world.

of  course,  the  reasons  we  have  given  for  believing  in—or  at  least  not  yet  rejecting—
supersymmetry are far from airtight. we have described how supersymmetry elevates our theories to
their most symmetric form—but you might suggest that the universe does not care about attaining the
most symmetric form that is mathematically possible. we have noted the important technical point that
supersymmetry  relieves  us  from  the  delicate  task  of  tuning  numerical  parameters  in  the  standard
model to avoid subtle quantum problems—but you might argue that the true theory describing nature
may very well walk the fine edge between self-consistency and self-destruction. we have discussed
how  supersymmetry  modifies  the  intrinsic  strengths  of  the  three  nongravitational  forces  at  tiny
distances in just the right way for them to merge together into a grand unified force—but you might
argue, again, that nothing in the design of nature dictates that these force strengths must exactly match
on  microscopic  scales.  and  finally,  you  might  suggest  that  a  simpler  explanation  for  why  the
superpartner  particles  have  never  been  found  is  that  our  universe  is  not  supersymmetric  and,
therefore, the superpartners do not exist.

no  one  can  refute  any  of  these  responses.  but  the  case  for  supersymmetry  is  strengthened

immensely when we consider its role in string theory.

supersymmetry in string theory

the original string theory that emerged from veneziano's work in the late 1960s incorporated all of
the symmetries discussed at the beginning of this chapter, but it did not incorporate supersymmetry
(which  had  not  yet  been  discovered).  this  first  theory  based  on  the  string  concept  was,  more
precisely,  called  the bosonic string theory.  the  name bosonic  indicates  that  all  of  the  vibrational
patterns of the bosonic string have spins that are a whole number—there are no fermionic patterns,
that is, no patterns with spins differing from a whole number by a half unit. this led to two problems.
first,  if  string  theory  was  to  describe  all  forces  and  all  matter,  it  would  somehow  have  to
incorporate  fermionic  vibrational  patterns,  since  the  known  matter  particles  all  have  spin-1/2.
second, and far more troubling, was the realization that there was one pattern of vibration in bosonic
string theory whose mass (more precisely, whose mass squared) was negative—a so-called tachyon.
even before string theory, physicists had studied the possibility that our world might have tachyon
particles, in addition to the familiar particles that all have positive masses, but their efforts showed
that it is difficult if not impossible for such a theory to be logically sensible. similarly, in the context
of  bosonic  string  theory,  physicists  tried  all  sorts  of  fancy  footwork  to  make  sense  of  the  bizarre
prediction of a tachyon vibrational pattern, but to no avail. these features made it increasingly clear
that although it was an interesting theory, the bosonic string was missing something essential.

in  1971,  pierre  ramond  of  the  university  of  florida  took  up  the  challenge  of  modifying  the
bosonic  string  theory  to  include  fermionic  patterns  of  vibration.  through  his  work  and  subsequent
results of schwarz and andre neveu, a new version of string theory began to emerge. and much to
everyone's surprise, the bosonic and the fermionic patterns of vibration of this new theory appeared
to come in pairs. for each bosonic pattern there was a fermionic pattern, and vice versa. by 1977,
insights  of  ferdinando  gliozzi  of  the  university  of  turin,  scherk,  and  david  olive  of  imperial
college put this pairing into the proper light. the new string theory incorporated supersymmetry, and
the  observed  pairing  of  bosonic  and  fermionic  vibrational  patterns  reflected  this  highly  symmetric
character. supersymmetric string theory—superstring theory, that is—had been born. moreover, the
work of gliozzi, scherk, and olive had one other crucial result: they showed that the troublesome
tachyon vibration of the bosonic string does not afflict the superstring. slowly, the pieces of the string
puzzle were falling into place.

nevertheless, the major initial impact of the work of ramond, and also of neveu and schwarz,
was not actually in string theory. by 1973, the physicists julius wess and bruno zumino realized that
supersymmetry—the new symmetry emerging from the reformulation of string theory—was applicable
even to theories based on point particles. they rapidly made important strides toward incorporating
supersymmetry  into  the  framework  of  point-particle  quantum  field  theory. and  since,  at  the  time,
quantum field theory was the central rage of the mainstream particle-physics community—with string
theory increasingly becoming a subject on the fringe—the insights of wess and zumino launched a
tremendous amount of subsequent research on what has come to be called supersymmetric quantum
field theory. the supersymmetric standard model, discussed in the preceding section, is one of the
crowning theoretical achievements of these pursuits; we now see that, through historical twists and
turns, even this point-particle theory owes a great debt to string theory.

with the resurgence of superstring theory in the mid-1980s, supersymmetry has re-emerged in the
context  of  its  original  discovery.  and  in  this  framework,  the  case  for  supersymmetry  goes  well
beyond that presented in the preceding section. string theory is the only way we know of to merge
general relativity and quantum mechanics. but it's only the supersymmetric version of string theory
that  avoids  the  pernicious  tachyon  problem  and  that  has  fermionic  vibrational  patterns  that  can
account  for  the  matter  particles  constituting  the  world  around  us.  supersymmetry  therefore  comes

hand-in-hand with string theory's proposal for a quantum theory of gravity, as well as with its grand
claim  of  uniting  all  forces  and  all  of  matter.  if  string  theory  is  right,  physicists  expect  that  so  is
supersymmetry.

until  the  mid-1990s,  however,  one  particularly  troublesome  aspect  plagued  supersymmetric

string theory.

a super-embarrassment of riches

if someone tells you that they have solved the mystery of amelia earhart's fate, you might be skeptical
at first, but if they have a well-documented, thoroughly pondered explanation, you would probably
hear them out and, who knows, you might even be convinced. but what if, in the next breath, they tell
you that they actually have a second explanation as well. you listen patiently and are surprised to find
the alternate explanation to be as well documented and thought through as the first. and after finishing
the second explanation, you are presented with a third, a fourth, and even a fifth explanation—each
different  from  the  others  and  yet  equally  convincing.  no  doubt,  by  the  end  of  the  experience  you
would  feel  no  closer  to  amelia  earhart's  true  fate  than  you  did  at  the  outset.  in  the  arena  of
fundamental explanations, more is definitely less.

by  1985,  string  theory—notwithstanding  the  justified  excitement  it  was  engendering—was
starting to sound like our overzealous earhart expert. the reason is that by 1985 physicists realized
that  supersymmetry,  by  then  a  central  element  in  the  structure  of  string  theory,  could  actually  be
incorporated into string theory in not one but five different ways. each method results in a pairing of
bosonic and fermionic vibrational patterns, but the details of this pairing as well as numerous other
properties of the resulting theories differ substantially. although their names are not all that important,
it's worth recording that these five supersymmetric string theories are called the type i theory, the
type iia theory, the type iib theory, the heterotic type o(32) theory (pronounced "oh-thirty-two"),
and the heterotic type e8 × e8 theory (pronounced "e-eight times e-eight"). all the features of string
theory that we have discussed to this point are valid for each of these theories—they differ only in the
finer details.

having five different versions of what is supposedly the t.o.e.—possibly the ultimate unified
theory—was quite an embarrassment for string theorists. just as there is only one true explanation for
whatever happened to amelia earhart (regardless of whether we will ever find it), we expect the
same to be true regarding the deepest, most fundamental understanding of how the world works. we
live in one universe; we expect one explanation.

one  suggestion  for  resolving  this  problem  might  be  that  although  there  are  five  different
superstring  theories,  four  might  be  ruled  out  simply  by  experiment,  leaving  one  true  and  relevant
explanatory  framework.  but  even  if  this  were  the  case,  we  would  still  be  left  with  the  nagging
question of why the other theories exist in the first place. in the wry words of witten, "if one of the
five theories describes our universe, who lives in the other four worlds?"7 a physicist's dream is that
the search for the ultimate answers will lead to a single, unique, absolutely inevitable conclusion.
ideally, the final theory—whether string theory or something else—should be the way it is because
there  simply  is  no  other  possibility.  if  we  were  to  discover  that  there  is  only  one  logically  sound
theory  incorporating  the  basic  ingredients  of  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics,  many  feel  that  we
would have reached the deepest understanding of why the universe has the properties it does. in short,
this would be unified-theory paradise.8

as we will see in chapter 12, recent research has taken superstring theory one giant step closer
to this unified utopia by showing that the five different theories are, remarkably, actually five different
ways  of  describing one  and  the  same  overarching  theory.  superstring  theory has  the  uniqueness
pedigree.

things  seem  to  be  falling  into  place,  but,  as  we  will  discuss  in  the  next  chapter,  unification

through string theory does require one more significant departure from conventional wisdom.

chapter 8

more dimensions than meet the eye

einstein resolved two of the major scientific conflicts of the past hundred years through special and
then  general  relativity. although  the  initial  problems  that  motivated  his  work  did  not  portend  the
outcome,  each  of  these  resolutions  completely  transformed  our  understanding  of  space  and  time.
string theory resolves the third major scientific conflict of the past century and, in a manner that even
einstein would likely have found remarkable, it requires that we subject our conceptions of space and
time  to  yet  another  radical  revision.  string  theory  so  thoroughly  shakes  the  foundations  of  modern
physics that even the generally accepted number of dimensions in our universe—something so basic
that you might think it beyond questioning—is dramatically and convincingly overthrown.

the illusion of the familiar

experience informs intuition. but it does more than that: experience sets the frame within which we
analyze  and  interpret  what  we  perceive. you  would  no  doubt  expect,  for  instance,  that  the  "wild
child"  raised  by  a  pack  of  wolves  would  interpret  the  world  from  a  perspective  that  differs
substantially from your own. even less extreme comparisons, such as those between people raised in
very different cultural traditions, serve to underscore the degree to which our experiences determine
our interpretive mindset.

yet there are certain things that we all experience. and it is often the beliefs and expectations
that follow from these universal experiences that can be the hardest to identify and the most difficult
to challenge. a simple but profound example is the following. if you were to get up from reading this
book,  you  could  move  in  three  independent  directions—that  is,  through  three  independent  spatial
dimensions. absolutely  any  path  you  follow—regardless  of  how  complicated—results  from  some
combination  of  motion  through  what  we  might  call  the  "left-right  dimension,"  the  "back-forth
dimension,"  and  the  "up-down  dimension."  every  time  you  take  a  step  you  implicitly  make  three
separate choices that determine how you move through these three dimensions.

an  equivalent  statement,  as  encountered  in  our  discussion  of  special  relativity,  is  that  any
location in the universe can be fully specified by giving three pieces of data: where it is relative to
these three spatial dimensions. in familiar language, you can specify a city address, say, by giving a
street (location in the "left-right dimension"), a cross street or an avenue (location in the "back-forth
dimension"), and a floor number (location in the "up-down dimension"). and from a more modern
perspective,  we  have  seen  that  einstein's  work  encourages  us  to  think  about  time  as  another
dimension (the "future-past dimension"), giving us a total of four dimensions (three space dimensions
and one time dimension). you specify events in the universe by telling where and when they occur.

this feature of the universe is so basic, so consistent, and so thoroughly pervasive that it really
does  seem  beyond  questioning.  in  1919,  however,  a  little-known  polish  mathematician  named

theodor  kaluza  from  the  university  of  königsberg  had  the  temerity  to  challenge  the  obvious—he
suggested  that  the  universe  might not  actually  have  three  spatial  dimensions;  it  might  have more.
sometimes silly-sounding suggestions are plain silly. sometimes they rock the foundations of physics.
although it took quite some time to percolate, kaluza's suggestion has revolutionized our formulation
of physical law. we are still feeling the aftershocks of his astonishingly prescient insight.

kaluza's idea and klein's refinement

the  suggestion  that  our  universe  might  have  more  than  three  spatial  dimensions  may  well  sound
fatuous, bizarre, or mystical. in reality, though, it is concrete and thoroughly plausible. to see this, it's
easiest to shift our sights temporarily from the whole universe and think about a more familiar object,
such as a long, thin garden hose.

imagine that a few hundred feet of garden hose is stretched across a canyon, and you view it
from, say, a quarter of a mile away, as in figure 8.1(a). from this distance, you will easily perceive
the long, unfurled, horizontal extent of the hose, but unless you have uncanny eyesight, the thickness of
the hose will be difficult to discern. from your distant vantage point, you would think that if an ant
were constrained to live on the hose, it would have only one dimension in which to walk: the left-
right dimension along the hose's length. if someone asked you to specify where the ant was at a given
moment, you would need to give only one piece of data: the distance of the ant from the left (or the
right) end of the hose. the upshot is that from a quarter of a mile away, a long piece of garden hose
appears to be a one-dimensional object.

figure 8.1 (a) a garden hose viewed from a substantial distance looks like a one-dimensional object.
(b) when magnified, a second dimension—one that is in the shape of a circle and is curled around the
hose—becomes visible.

in  reality,  we  know  that  the  hose does  have  thickness. you  might  have  trouble  resolving  this
from a quarter mile, but by using a pair of binoculars you can zoom in on the hose and observe its
girth directly, as shown in figure 8.1(b). from this magnified perspective, you see that a little ant
living on the hose actually has two independent directions in which it can walk: along the left-right
dimension  spanning  the  length  of  the  hose  as  already  identified, and  along  the  "clockwise-
counterclockwise dimension" around the circular part of the hose. you now realize that to specify

where the tiny ant is at any given instant, you must actually give two pieces of data: where the ant is
along the length of the hose, and where the ant is along its circular girth. this reflects the fact the
surface of the garden hose is two-dimensional.1

nonetheless, there is a clear difference between these two dimensions. the direction along the
length of the hose is long, extended, and easily visible. the direction circling around the thickness of
the hose is short, "curled up," and harder to see. to become aware of the circular dimension, you
have to examine the hose with significantly greater precision.

this example underscores a subtle and important feature of spatial dimensions: they come in two
varieties. they can be large, extended, and therefore directly manifest, or they can be small, curled
up, and much more difficult to detect. of course, in this example you did not have to exert a great deal
of effort to reveal the "curled-up" dimension encircling the thickness of the hose. you merely had to
use a pair of binoculars. however, if you had a very thin garden hose—as thin as a hair or a capillary
—detecting its curled-up dimension would be more difficult.

in a paper he sent to einstein in 1919, kaluza made an astounding suggestion. he proposed that
the  spatial  fabric  of  the  universe  might  possess  more  than  the  three  dimensions  of  common
experience.  the  motivation  for  this  radical  thesis,  as  we  will  discuss  shortly,  was  kaluza's
realization  that  it  provided  an  elegant  and  compelling  framework  for  weaving  together  einstein's
general relativity and maxwell's electromagnetic theory into a single, unified conceptual framework.
but, more immediately, how can this proposal be squared with the apparent fact that we see precisely
three spatial dimensions?

the  answer,  implicit  in  kaluza's  work  and  subsequently  made  explicit  and  refined  by  the
swedish  mathematician  oskar  klein  in  1926,  is  that the  spatial  fabric  of  our  universe  may  have
both extended and curled-up dimensions. that is, just like the horizontal extent of the garden hose,
our universe has dimensions that are large, extended, and easily visible—the three spatial dimensions
of  common  experience.  but  like  the  circular  girth  of  a  garden  hose,  the  universe  may  also  have
additional spatial dimensions that are tightly curled up into a tiny space—a space so tiny that it has so
far eluded detection by even our most refined experimental equipment.

to  gain  a  clearer  image  of  this  remarkable  proposal,  let's  reconsider  the  garden  hose  for  a
moment. imagine that the hose is painted with closely spaced black circles along its girth. from far
away,  as  before,  the  garden  hose  looks  like  a  thin,  one-dimensional  line.  but  if  you  zoom  in  with
binoculars, you can detect the curled-up dimension, even more easily after our paint job, and you see
the image illustrated in figure 8.2. this figure emphasizes that the surface of the garden hose is two-
dimensional,  with  one  large,  extended  dimension  and  one  small,  circular  dimension.  kaluza  and
klein  proposed  that  our  spatial  universe  is  similar,  but  that  it  has  three  large,  extended  spatial
dimensions and one small, circular dimension—for a total of four spatial dimensions. it is difficult to
draw  something  with  that  many  dimensions,  so  for  visualization  purposes  we  must  settle  for  an
illustration incorporating two large dimensions and one small, circular dimension. we illustrate this
in figure 8.3, in which we magnify the fabric of space in much the same way that we zoomed in on the
surface of the garden hose.

figure 8.2 the surface of the garden hose is two-dimensional: one dimension (its horizontal extent),
emphasized  by  the  straight  arrow,  is  long  and  extended;  the  other  dimension  (its  circular  girth),
emphasized by the circular arrow, is short and curled up.

figure 8.3 as  in  figure  5.1,  each  subsequent  level  represents  a  huge  magnification  of  the  spatial
fabric displayed in the previous level. our universe may have extra dimensions—as we see by the
fourth level of magnification—so long as they are curled up into a space small enough to have as yet
evaded direct detection.

the  lowest  image  in  the  figure  shows  the  apparent  structure  of  space—the  ordinary  world

around us—on familiar distance scales such as meters. these distances are represented by the largest
set of grid lines. in the subsequent images, we zoom in on the fabric of space by focusing our attention
on ever smaller regions, which we sequentially magnify in order to make them easily visible. at first
as we examine the fabric of space on shorter distance scales, not much happens; it appears to retain
the same basic form as it has on larger scales, as we see in the first three levels of magnification.
however,  as  we  continue  on  our  journey  toward  the  most  microscopic  examination  of  space—the
fourth level of magnification in figure 8.3—a new, curled-up, circular dimension becomes apparent,
much like the circular loops of thread making up the pile of a tightly woven piece of carpet. kaluza
and klein suggested that the extra circular dimension exists at every point in the extended dimensions,
just as the circular girth of the garden hose exists at every point along its unfurled, horizontal extent.
(for visual clarity, we have drawn only an illustrative sample of the circular dimension at regularly
spaced points in the extended dimensions.) we show a close-up of the kaluza-klein vision of the
microscopic structure of the spatial fabric in figure 8.4.

the similarity with the garden hose is manifest, although there are some important differences.
the  universe  has  three  large,  extended  space  dimensions  (only  two  of  which  we  have  actually
drawn), compared with the garden hose's one, and, more important, we are now describing the spatial
fabric of the universe itself, not just an object, like the garden hose, that exists within the universe.
but the basic idea is the same: like the circular girth of the garden hose, if the additional curled-up,
circular dimension of the universe is extremely small, it is much harder to detect than the manifest,
large, extended dimensions. in fact, if its size is small enough, it will be beyond detection by even our
most  powerful  magnifying  instruments.  and,  of  utmost  importance,  the  circular  dimension  is not
merely a circular bump within the familiar extended dimensions as the illustration might lead you to
believe.  rather,  the  circular  dimension  is  a new  dimension,  one  that  exists  at  every  point  in  the
familiar extended dimensions just as each of the up-down, left-right, and back-forth dimensions exists
at every point as well. it is a new and independent direction in which an ant, if it were small enough,
could move. to specify the spatial location of such a microscopic ant, we would need to say where it
is  in  the  three  familiar  extended  dimensions  (represented  by  the  grid)  and also  where  it  is  in  the
circular dimension. we would need four pieces of spatial information; if we add in time, we get a
total of five pieces of spacetime information—one more than we normally would expect.

figure  8.4  the  grid  lines  represent  the  extended  dimensions  of  common  experience,  whereas  the
circles are a new, tiny, curled-up dimension. like the circular loops of thread making up the pile of a
carpet, the circles exist at every point in the familiar extended dimensions—but for visual clarity we
draw them as spread out on intersecting grid lines.

and so, rather surprisingly, we see that although we are aware of only three extended spatial
dimensions,  kaluza's  and  klein's  reasoning  shows  that  this  does  not  preclude  the  existence  of
additional curled-up dimensions, at least if they are very small. the universe may very well have
more dimensions than meet the eye.

how small is "small?" cutting-edge equipment can detect structures as small as a billionth of a
billionth of a meter. so long as an extra dimension is curled up to a size less than this tiny distance, it
is too small for us to detect. in 1926 klein combined kaluza's initial suggestion with some ideas from
the  emerging  field  of  quantum  mechanics.  his  calculations  indicated  that  the  additional  circular
dimension might be as small as the planck length, far shorter than experimental accessibility. since
then, physicists have called the possibility of extra tiny space dimensions kaluza-klein theory.2

comings and goings on a garden hose

the tangible example of the garden hose and the illustration in figure 8.3 are meant to give you some
sense of how it is possible that our universe has extra spatial dimensions. but even for researchers in
the field, it is quite difficult to visualize a universe with more than three spatial dimensions. for this
reason, physicists often hone their intuition about these extra dimensions by contemplating what life
would be like if we lived in an imaginary lower-dimensional universe—following the lead of edwin
abbott's  enchanting  1884  classic  popularization flatland3—in  which  we  slowly  realize  that  the
universe has more dimensions than those of which we are directly aware. let's try this by imagining a
two-dimensional  universe  shaped  like  our  garden  hose.  doing  so  requires  that  you  relinquish  an
"outsider's" perspective that views the garden hose as an object in our universe. rather, you must
leave the world as we know it and enter a new garden-hose universe in which the surface of a very
long garden hose (you can think of it as being infinitely long) is all there is as far as spatial extent.
imagine that you are a tiny ant living your life on its surface.

let's start by making things even a little more extreme. imagine that the length of the circular
dimension of the garden-hose universe is very short—so short that neither you nor any of your fellow
hose-dwellers  are  even  aware  of  its  existence.  instead,  you  and  everyone  else  living  in  the  hose
universe take one basic fact of life to be so evident as to be beyond questioning: the universe has one
spatial dimension. (if the garden-hose universe had produced its own ant-einstein, hose-dwellers
would say that the universe has one spatial and one time dimension.) in fact, this feature is so self-
evident  that  hose-dwellers  have  named  their  home lineland,  directly  emphasizing  its  having  one
spatial dimension.

life in lineland is very different from life as we know it. for example, the body with which you
are familiar cannot fit in lineland. no matter how much effort you may put into body reshaping, one
thing you can't get around is that you definitely have length, width, and breadth—spatial extent in three
dimensions. in lineland there is no room for such an extravagant design. remember, although your
mental image of lineland may still be tied to a long, threadlike object existing in our space, you really
need to think of lineland as a universe—all there is. as an inhabitant of lineland you must fit within
its spatial extent. try to imagine it. even if you take on an ant's body, you still will not fit. you must
squeeze  your  ant  body  to  look  more  like  a  worm,  and  then  further  squeeze  it  until  you  have  no
thickness at all. to fit in lineland you must be a being that has only length.

imagine further that you have an eye on each end of your body. unlike your human eyes, which
can swivel around to look in all three dimensions, your eyes as a linebeing are forever locked into

position, each staring off into the one-dimensional distance. this is not an anatomical limitation of
your  new  body.  instead,  you  and  all  other  linebeings  recognize  that  since  lineland  has  but  one
dimension, there simply isn't another direction in which your eyes can look. forward and backward
exhaust the extent of lineland.

we can try to go further in imagining life in lineland, but we quickly realize that there's not much
more to it. for instance, if another linebeing is on one or the other side of you, picture how it will
appear: you will see one of her eyes—the one facing you—but unlike human eyes, hers will be a
single dot. eyes in lineland have no features and display no emotion—there is just no room for these
familiar  characteristics.  moreover,  you  will  be  forever  stuck  with  this  dotlike  image  of  your
neighbor's eye. if you wanted to pass her and explore the realm of lineland on the other side of her
body, you would be in for a great disappointment. you can't pass by her.  she is fully "blocking the
road,"  and  there  is  no  space  in  lineland  to  go  around  her.  the  order  of  linebeings  as  they  are
sprinkled along the extent of lineland is fixed and unchanging. what drudgery.

a few thousand years after a religous epiphany in lineland, a linebeing named kaluza k. line
offers some hope for the downtrodden line-dwellers. either from divine inspiration or from the sheer
exasperation of years of staring at his neighbor's dot-eye, he suggests that lineland may not be one-
dimensional after all. what if, he theorizes, lineland is actually two-dimensional, with the second
space  dimension  being  a  very  small  circular  direction  that  has,  as  yet,  evaded  direct  detection
because of its tiny spatial extent. he goes on to paint a picture of a vastly new life, if only this curled-
up space direction would expand in size—something that is at least possible according to the recent
work  of  his  colleague,  linestein.  kaluza  k.  line  describes  a  universe  that  amazes  you  and  your
comrades and fills everyone with hope—a universe in which linebeings can move freely past one
another  by  making  use  of  the  second  dimension:  the  end  of  spatial  enslavement.  we  realize  that
kaluza k. line is describing life in a "thickened" garden-hose universe.

in  fact,  if  the  circular  dimension  were  to  grow,  "inflating"  lineland  into  the  garden-hose
universe, your life would change in profound ways. take your body, for example. as a linebeing,
anything between your two eyes constitutes the interior of your body. your eyes, therefore, play the
same role for your linebody as skin plays for an ordinary human body: they constitute the barrier
between the inside of your body and the outside world. a doctor in lineland can access the interior
of your linebody only by puncturing its surface—in other words, "surgery" in lineland takes place
through the eyes.

but now imagine what happens if lineland does, a la kaluza k. line, have a secret, curled-up
dimension, and if this dimension expands to an observably large size. now one linebeing can view
your body at an angle and thereby directly see into its interior, as we illustrate in figure 8.5. using
this second dimension, a doctor can operate on your body by reaching directly inside your exposed
interior. weird! in time, linebeings, no doubt, would develop a skinlike cover to shield the newly
exposed  interior  of  their  bodies  from  contact  with  the  outside  world. and  moreover,  they  would
undoubtedly  evolve  into  beings  with  length  as  well  as  breadth:  flatbeings  sliding  along  the  two-
dimensional garden-hose universe as illustrated in figure 8.6. if the circular dimension were to grow
very large this two-dimensional universe would be closely akin to abbott's flatland—an imaginary
two-dimensional world abbott suffused with a rich cultural heritage and even a satirical caste system
based upon one's geometrical shape. whereas it's hard to imagine anything interesting happening in
lineland—there is just not enough room—life on a garden-hose becomes replete with possibilities.
the evolution from one to two observably large space dimensions is dramatic.

figure 8.5 one linebeing can see directly into the interior of another's body when lineland expands
into the garden-hose universe.

and now the refrain: why stop there? the two-dimensional universe might itself have a curled-
up dimension and therefore secretly be three-dimensional. we can illustrate this with figure 8.4, so
long as we recognize that we are now imagining that there are only two extended space dimensions
(whereas  when  we  first  introduced  this  figure  we  were  imagining  the  flat  grid  to  represent  three
extended dimensions). if the circular dimension should expand, a two-dimensional being would find
itself in a vastly new world in which movement is not limited just to left-right and back-forth along
the extended dimensions. now, a being can also move in a third dimension—the "up-down" direction
along the circle. in fact, if the circular dimension were to grow to a large enough size, this could be
our  three-dimensional  universe.  we  do  not  know  at  present  whether  any  of  our  three  spatial
dimensions  extends  outward  forever,  or  in  fact  curls  back  on  itself  in  the  shape  of  a  giant  circle,
beyond  the  range  of  our  most  powerful  telescopes.  if  the  circular  dimension  in  figure  8.4  got  big
enough—billions of light-years in extent—the figure could very well be a drawing of our world.

figure 8.6 flat, two-dimensional beings living in the garden-hose universe.

but the refrain replays: why stop there? this takes us to kaluza's and klein's vision: that our
three-dimensional universe might have a previously unanticipated curled-up fourth spatial dimension.
if this striking possibility, or its generalization to numerous curled-up dimensions (to be discussed
shortly) is true, and if these curled-up dimensions were themselves to expand to a macroscopic size,
the  lower-dimensional  examples  discussed  make  it  clear  that  life  as  we  know  it  would  change
immensely.

surprisingly, though, even if they should always stay curled up and small, the existence of extra

curled-up dimensions has profound implications.

unification in higher dimensions

although kaluza's 1919 suggestion that our universe might have more spatial dimensions than those of
which  we  are  directly  aware  was  a  remarkable  possibility  in  its  own  right,  something  else  really
made it compelling. einstein had formulated general relativity in the familiar setting of a universe
with  three  spatial  dimensions  and  one  time  dimension.  the  mathematical  formalism  of  his  theory,
however, could be extended fairly directly to write down analogous equations for a universe with
additional space dimensions. under the "modest" assumption of one extra space dimension, kaluza
carried out the mathematical analysis and explicitly derived the new equations.

he found that in the revised formulation the equations pertaining to the three ordinary dimensions
were  essentially  identical  to  einstein's.  but  because  he  included  an  extra  space  dimension,  not
surprisingly kaluza found extra equations beyond those einstein originally derived. after studying the
extra  equations  associated  with  the  new  dimension,  kaluza  realized  that  something  amazing  was
going on. the extra equations were none other than those maxwell had written down in the 1880s for
describing  the  electromagnetic  force!  by  adding  another  space  dimension,  kaluza  had  united
einstein's theory of gravity with maxwell's theory of light.

before  kaluza's  suggestion,  gravity  and  electromagnetism  were  thought  of  as  two  unrelated
forces;  nothing  had  even  hinted  that  there  might  be  a  relation  between  them.  by  having  the  bold
creativity to imagine that our universe has an additional space dimension, kaluza suggested that there
was  a  deep  connection,  indeed.  his  theory  argued  that  both  gravity  and  electromagnetism  are
associated with ripples in the fabric of space. gravity is carried by ripples in the familiar three space
dimensions, while electromagnetism is carried by ripples involving the new, curled-up dimension.

kaluza sent his paper to einstein, and at first einstein was quite intrigued. on april 21, 1919,
einstein wrote back to kaluza and told him that it had never occurred to him that unification might be
achieved "through a five-dimensional [four space and one time] cylinder-world." he added, "at first
glance, i like your idea enormously."4 about a week later, though, einstein wrote kaluza again, this
time with some skepticism: "i have read through your paper and find it really interesting. nowhere, so
far, can i see an impossibility. on the other hand, i have to admit that the arguments brought forward
so far do not appear convincing enough."5 but then, on october 14, 1921, more than two years later,
einstein wrote to kaluza again, having had time to digest kaluza's novel approach more fully: "i am
having  second  thoughts  about  having  restrained  you  from  publishing  your  idea  on  a  unification  of
gravitation and electricity two years ago. . .. if you wish, i shall present your paper to the academy
after all."6 belatedly, kaluza had received the master's stamp of approval.

although it was a beautiful idea, subsequent detailed study of kaluza's proposal, augmented by
klein's  contributions,  showed  that  it  was  in  serious  conflict  with  experimental  data.  the  simplest
attempts to incorporate the electron into the theory predicted relations between its mass and its charge
that were vastly different from their measured values. because there did not seem to be any obvious
way of getting around this problem, many of the physicists who had taken notice of kaluza's idea lost
interest. einstein and others continued, now and then, to dabble with the possibility of extra curled-up
dimensions, but it quickly came to be an enterprise on the outskirts of theoretical physics.

in a real sense, kaluza's idea was way ahead of its time. the 1920s marked the start of a bull
market for theoretical and experimental physics concerned with understanding the basic laws of the
microworld.  theorists  had  their  hands  full  as  they  sought  to  develop  the  structure  of  quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory. experimentalists had the detailed properties of the atom as well

as  numerous  other  elementary  material  constituents  to  discover.  theory  guided  experiment  and
experiment  refined  theory  as  physicists  pushed  forward  for  half  a  century,  ultimately  to  reveal  the
standard model. it is no wonder that speculations on extra dimensions took a distant backseat during
these  productive  and  heady  times.  with  physicists  exploring  powerful  quantum  methods,  the
implications of which gave rise to experimentally testable predictions, there was little interest in the
mere possibility that the universe might be a vastly different place on length scales far too small to be
probed by even the most powerful of instruments.

but sooner or later, bull markets lose steam. by the late 1960s and early 1970s the theoretical
structure  of  the  standard  model  was  in  place.  by  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s  many  of  its
predictions had been verified experimentally, and most particle physicists concluded that it was just a
matter of time before the rest were confirmed as well. although a few important details remained
unresolved,  many  felt  that  the  major  questions  concerning  the  strong,  weak,  and  electromagnetic
forces had been answered.

the time was finally ripe to return to the grandest question of all: the enigmatic conflict between
general relativity and quantum mechanics. the success in formulating a quantum theory of three of
nature's forces emboldened physicists to try to bring the fourth, gravity, into the fold. having pursued
numerous  ideas  that  all  ultimately  failed,  the  mind-set  of  the  community  became  more  open  to
comparatively radical approaches. after being left for dead in the late 1920s, kaluza-klein theory
was resuscitated.

modern kaluza-klein theory

the understanding of physics had significantly changed and substantially deepened in the six decades
since kaluza's original proposal. quantum mechanics had been fully formulated and experimentally
verified.  the  strong  and  the  weak  forces,  unknown  in  the  1920s,  had  been  discovered  and  were
largely understood. some physicists suggested that kaluza's original proposal had failed because he
was unaware of these other forces and had therefore been too conservative in his revamping of space.
more  forces  meant  the  need  for  even  more  dimensions.  it  was  argued  that  a  single  new,  circular
dimension,  although  able  to  show  hints  of  a  connection  between  general  relativity  and
electromagnetism, was just not enough.

by  the  mid-1970s,  an  intense  research  effort  was  underway,  focusing  on  higher-dimensional
theories with numerous curled-up spatial directions. figure 8.7 illustrates an example with two extra
dimensions that are curled up into the surface of a ball—that is, a sphere. as in the case of the single
circular  dimension,  these  extra  dimensions  are  tacked  on  to every  point  of  the  familiar  extended
dimensions.  (for  visual  clarity  we  again  have  drawn  only  an  illustrative  sample  of  the  spherical
dimensions at regularly spaced grid points in the extended dimensions.) beyond proposing a different
number of extra dimensions, one can also imagine other shapes for the extra dimensions. for instance,
in figure 8.8 we illustrate a possibility in which there are again two extra dimensions, now in the
shape  of  a  hollow  doughnut—that  is,  a  torus. although  they  are  beyond  our  ability  to  draw,  more
complicated possibilities can be imagined in which there are three, four, five, essentially any number
of  extra  spatial  dimensions,  curled  up  into  a  wide  spectrum  of  exotic  shapes.  the  essential
requirement,  again,  is  that  all  of  these  dimensions  have  a  spatial  extent  smaller  than  the  smallest
length scales we can probe, since no experiment has yet revealed their existence.

figure 8.7 two extra dimensions curled up into the shape of a sphere.

figure 8.8 two extra dimensions curled up in the shape of a hollow doughnut, or torus.

the  most  promising  of  the  higher-dimensional  proposals  were  those  that  also  incorporated
supersymmetry. physicists hoped that the partial cancelling of the most severe quantum fluctuations,
arising from the pairing of superpartner particles, would help to soften the hostilities between gravity
and  quantum  mechanics.  they  coined  the  name higher-dimensional supergravity  to  describe  those
theories encompassing gravity, extra dimensions, and supersymmetry.

as  had  been  the  case  with  kaluza's  original  attempt,  various  versions  of  higher-dimensional
supergravity looked quite promising at first. the new equations resulting from the extra dimensions
were strikingly reminiscent of those used in the description of electromagnetism, and the strong and
the weak forces. but detailed scrutiny showed that the old conundrums persisted. most importantly,
the pernicious short-distance quantum undulations of space were lessened by supersymmetry, but not
sufficiently  to  yield  a  sensible  theory.  physicists  also  found  it  difficult  to  find  a  single,  sensible,
higher-dimensional theory incorporating all features of forces and matter.7

it  gradually  became  clear  that  bits  and  pieces  of  a  unified  theory  were  surfacing,  but  that  a
crucial element capable of tying them all together in a quantum-mechanically consistent manner was
missing. in 1984 this missing piece—string theory—dramatically entered the story and took center
stage.

more dimensions and string theory

by now you should be convinced that our universe may have additional curled-up spatial dimensions;

certainly, so long as they are small enough, nothing rules them out. but extra dimensions may strike
you as an artifice. our inability to probe distances smaller than a billionth of a billionth of a meter
permits  not  only  extra  tiny  dimensions  but  all  manner  of  whimsical  possibilities  as  well—even  a
microscopic  civilization  populated  by  even  tinier  green  people.  while  the  former  certainly  seems
more rationally motivated than the latter, the act of postulating either of these experimentally untested
—and, at present, untestable—possibilities might seem equally arbitrary.

such  was  the  case  until  string  theory.  here  is  a  theory  that  resolves  the  central  dilemma
confronting  contemporary  physics—the  incompatibility  between  quantum  mechanics  and  general
relativity—and that unifies our understanding of all of nature's fundamental material constituents and
forces. but to accomplish these feats, it turns out that string theory requires that the universe have
extra space dimensions.

here's  why.  one  of  the  main  insights  of  quantum  mechanics  is  that  our  predictive  power  is
fundamentally  limited  to  asserting  that  such-and-such  outcome  will  occur  with  such-and-such
probability. although einstein felt that this was a distasteful feature of our modern understanding, and
you may agree, it certainly appears to be fact. let's accept it. now, we all know that probabilities are
always numbers between 0 and 1—equivalently, when expressed as percentages, probabilities are
numbers between 0 and 100. physicists have found that a key signal that a quantum-mechanical theory
has  gone  haywire  is  that  particular  calculations  yield  "probabilities"  that  are not  within  this
acceptable  range.  for  instance,  we  mentioned  earlier  that  a  sign  of  the  grinding  incompatibility
between general relativity and quantum mechanics in a point-particle framework is that calculations
result in infinite probabilities. as we have discussed, string theory cures these infinities. but what we
have not as yet mentioned is that a residual, somewhat more subtle problem still remains. in the early
days of string theory physicists found that certain calculations yielded negative probabilities, which
are also outside of the acceptable range. so, at first sight, string theory appeared to be awash in its
own quantum-mechanical hot water.

with stubborn determination, physicists sought and found the cause of this unacceptable feature.
the  explanation  begins  with  a  simple  observation.  if  a  string  is  constrained  to  lie  on  a  two-
dimensional  surface—such  as  the  surface  of  a  table  or  a  garden  hose—the  number  of  independent
directions in which it can vibrate is reduced to two: the left-right and back-forth dimensions along the
surface. any vibrational pattern that remains on the surface involves some combination of vibrations
in these two directions. correspondingly, we see that this also means that a string in flatland, the
garden-hose universe, or in any other two-dimensional universe, is also constrained to vibrate in a
total of two independent spatial directions. if, however, the string is allowed to leave the surface, the
number  of  independent  vibrational  directions  increases  to  three,  since  the  string  then  can  also
oscillate in the up-down direction. equivalently, in a universe with three spatial dimensions, a string
can vibrate in three independent directions. although it gets harder to envision, the pattern continues:
in a universe with ever more spatial dimensions, there are ever more independent directions in which
it can vibrate.

we  emphasize  this  fact  of  string  vibrations  because  physicists  found  that  the  troublesome
calculations  were  highly  sensitive  to  the  number  of  independent  directions  in  which  a  string  can
vibrate.  the  negative  probabilities  arose  from  a mismatch  between  what  the  theory  required  and
what  reality  seemed  to  impose:  the  calculations  showed  that  if  strings  could  vibrate  in nine
independent spatial directions, all of the negative probabilities would cancel out. well, that's great in
theory, but so what? if string theory is meant to describe our world with three spatial dimensions, we
still seem to be in trouble.

but are we? taking a more than half-century-old lead, we see that kaluza and klein provide a
loophole. since strings are so small, not only can they vibrate in large, extended dimensions, they can
also  vibrate  in  ones  that  are  tiny  and  curled  up.  and  so  we can  meet  the  nine-space-dimension
requirement of string theory in our universe, by assuming—a la kaluza and klein—that in addition to
our familiar three extended spatial dimensions there are six other curled-up spatial dimensions. in this
manner, string theory, which appeared to be on the brink of elimination from the realm of physical
relevance, is saved. moreover, rather than just postulating the existence of extra dimensions, as had
been  done  by  kaluza,  klein,  and  their  followers,  string  theory requires  them.  for  string  theory  to
make sense, the universe should have nine space dimensions and one time dimension, for a total of ten
dimensions. in this way, kaluza's 1919 proposal finds its most convincing and powerful forum.

some questions

this raises a number of questions. first, why does string theory require the particular number of nine
space dimensions to avoid nonsensical probability values? this is probably the hardest question in
string theory to answer without appealing to mathematical formalism. a straightforward string theory
calculation reveals this answer, but no one has an intuitive, nontechnical explanation for the particular
number that emerges. the physicist ernest rutherford once said, in essence, that if you can't explain a
result  in  simple,  nontechnical  terms,  then  you  don't  really  understand  it.  he  wasn't  saying  that  this
means your result is wrong; rather, he was saying that it means you do not fully understand its origin,
meaning,  or  implications.  perhaps  this  is  true  regarding  the  extradimensional  character  of  string
theory.  (in  fact,  let's  take  this  opportunity  to  brace—parenthetically—for  a  central  aspect  of  the
second  superstring  revolution  that  we  will  discuss  in  chapter  12.  the  calculation  underlying  the
conclusion  that  there  are  ten  spacetime  dimensions—nine  space  and  one  time—turns  out  to  be
approximate.  in  the  mid-1990s,  witten,  based  on  his  own  insights  and  previous  work  by  michael
duff from texas a&m university and chris hull and paul townsend from cambridge university,
gave  convincing  evidence  that  the  approximate  calculation  actually misses  one  space  dimension:
string theory, he argued to most string theorists' amazement, actually requires ten space dimensions
and one time dimension, for a total of eleven dimensions. we will ignore this important result until
chapter 12, as it will have little direct bearing on the material we develop before then.)

second, if the equations of string theory (or, more precisely, the approximate equations guiding
our  pre–chapter  12  discussion)  show  that  the  universe  has  nine  space  dimensions  and  one  time
dimension, why is it that three space (and one time) dimensions are large and extended while all of
the  others  are  tiny  and  curled  up?  why  aren't  they all  extended,  or  all  curled  up,  or  some  other
possibility in between? at present no one knows the answer to this question. if string theory is right,
we should eventually be able to extract the answer, but as yet our understanding of the theory is not
refined enough to reach this goal. that's not to say that there haven't been valiant attempts to explain
it. for instance, from a cosmological perspective, we can imagine that all of the dimensions start out
being tightly curled up and then, in a big bang–like explosion, three spatial dimensions and one time
dimension unfurl and expand to their present large extent while the other spatial dimensions remain
small. rough arguments have been put forward as to why only three space dimensions grow large, as
we will discuss in chapter 14, but it's fair to say that these explanations are only in the formative
stages.  in  what  follows,  we  will  assume  that  all  but  three  space  dimensions  are  curled  up,  in
accordance with what we see around us. a primary goal of modern research is to establish that this

assumption emerges from the theory itself.

third,  given  the  requirement  of  numerous  extra  dimensions,  is  it  possible  that  some  are
additional time dimensions, as opposed to additional space dimensions? if you think about this for a
moment, you will see that it's a truly bizarre possibility. we all have a visceral understanding of what
it means for the universe to have multiple space dimensions, since we live in a world in which we
constantly deal with a plurality—three. but what would it mean to have multiple times? would one
align  with  time  as  we  presently  experience  it  psychologically  while  the  other  would  somehow  be
"different?"

it gets even stranger when you think about a curled-up time dimension. for instance, if a tiny ant
walks around an extra space dimension that is curled up like a circle, it will find itself returning to the
same position over and over again as it traverses complete circuits. this holds little mystery as we
are familiar with the ability to return, should we so choose, to the same location in space as often as
we  like.  but,  if  a  curled-up  dimension  is  a  time  dimension,  traversing  it  means  returning,  after  a
temporal  lapse,  to a  prior  instant  in  time.  this,  of  course,  is  well  beyond  the  realm  of  our
experience. time, as we know it, is a dimension we can traverse in only one direction with absolute
inevitability, never being able to return to an instant after it has passed. of course, it might be that
curled-up time dimensions have different properties from the familiar, vast time dimension that we
imagine  reaching  back  to  the  creation  of  the  universe  and  forward  to  the  present  moment.  but,  in
contrast  to  extra  spatial  dimensions,  new  and  previously  unknown  time  dimensions  would  clearly
require an even more monumental restructuring of our intuition. some theorists have been exploring
the  possibility  of  incorporating  extra  time  dimensions  into  string  theory,  but  as  yet  the  situation  is
inconclusive. in our discussion of string theory, we will stick to the more "conventional" approach in
which all of the curled-up dimensions are space dimensions, but the intriguing possibility of new time
dimensions could well play a role in future developments.

the physical implications of extra dimensions

years  of  research,  dating  back  to  kaluza's  original  paper,  have  shown  that  even  though  any  extra
dimensions  that  physicists  propose  must  be  smaller  than  we  or  our  equipment  can  directly  "see"
(since we haven't seen them), they do have important indirect effects on the physics that we observe.
in  string  theory,  this  connection  between  the  microscopic  properties  of  space  and  the  physics  we
observe is particularly transparent.

to understand this, you need to recall that masses and charges of particles in string theory are
determined by the possible resonant vibrational string patterns. picture a tiny string as it moves and
oscillates, and you will realize that the resonant patterns are influenced by its spatial surroundings.
think,  for  example,  of  ocean  waves.  out  in  the  grand  expanse  of  the  open  ocean,  isolated  wave
patterns  are  relatively  free  to  form  and  travel  this  way  or  that.  this  is  much  like  the  vibrational
patterns of a string as it moves through large, extended spatial dimensions. as in chapter 6, such a
string is equally free to oscillate in any of the extended directions at any moment. but if an ocean
wave passes through a more cramped spatial environment, the detailed form of its wave motion will
surely  be  affected  by,  for  example,  the  depth  of  the  water,  the  placement  and  shape  of  the  rocks
encountered, the canals through which the water is channeled, and so on. or, think of an organ pipe or
a french horn. the sounds that each of these instruments can produce are a direct consequence of the
resonant patterns of vibrating air streams in their interior; these are determined by the precise size

and  shape  of  the  spatial  surroundings  within  the  instrument  through  which  the  air  streams  are
channeled. curled-up spatial dimensions have a similar impact on the possible vibrational patterns of
a string. since tiny strings vibrate through all of the spatial dimensions, the precise way in which the
extra  dimensions  are  twisted  up  and  curled  back  on  each  other  strongly  influences  and  tightly
constrains  the  possible  resonant  vibrational  patterns.  these  patterns,  largely  determined  by  the
extradimensional  geometry,  constitute  the  array  of  possible  particle  properties  observed  in  the
familiar extended dimensions. this means that extradimensional geometry determines fundamental
physical attributes like particle masses and charges that we observe in the usual three large space
dimensions of common experience.

this is such a deep and important point that we say it once again, with feeling. according to
string  theory,  the  universe  is  made  up  of  tiny  strings  whose  resonant  patterns  of  vibration  are  the
microscopic  origin  of  particle  masses  and  force  charges.  string  theory  also  requires  extra  space
dimensions that must be curled up to a very small size to be consistent with our never having seen
them. but a tiny string can probe a tiny space. as a string moves about, oscillating as it travels, the
geometrical  form  of  the  extra  dimensions  plays  a  critical  role  in  determining  resonant  patterns  of
vibration.  because  the  patterns  of  string  vibrations  appear  to  us  as  the  masses  and  charges  of  the
elementary particles, we conclude that these fundamental properties of the universe are determined, in
large measure, by the geometrical size and shape of the extra dimensions. that's one of the most far-
reaching insights of string theory.

since the extra dimensions so profoundly influence basic physical properties of the universe, we
should now seek—with unbridled vigor—an understanding of what these curled-up dimensions look
like.

what do the curled-up dimensions look like?

the extra spatial dimensions of string theory cannot be "crumpled" up any which way; the equations
that emerge from the theory severely restrict the geometrical form that they can take. in 1984, philip
candelas  of  the  university  of  texas  at  austin,  gary  horowitz  and  andrew  strominger  of  the
university of california at santa barbara, and edward witten showed that a particular class of six-
dimensional geometrical shapes can meet these conditions. they are known as calabi-yau spaces (or
calabi-yau  shapes)  in  honor  of  two  mathematicians,  eugenio  calabi  from  the  university  of
pennsylvania and shing-tung yau from harvard university, whose research in a related context, but
prior to string theory, plays a central role in understanding these spaces. although the mathematics
describing calabi-yau spaces is intricate and subtle, we can get an idea of what they look like with a
picture.8

in figure 8.9 we show an example of a calabi-yau space. 9 as you view this figure, you must
bear  in  mind  that  the  image  has  built-in  limitations.  we  are  trying  to  represent  a  six-dimensional
shape on a two-dimensional piece of paper, and this introduces significant distortions. nevertheless,
the image does convey the rough idea of what a calabi-yau space looks like. 10 the shape in figure
8.9 is but one of many tens of thousands of examples of calabi-yau shapes that meet the stringent
requirements for the extra dimensions that emerge from string theory. although belonging to a club
with  tens  of  thousands  of  members  might  not  sound  very  exclusive,  you  must  compare  it  with  the
infinite number of shapes that are mathematically possible; by this measure calabi-yau spaces are
rare indeed.

figure 8.9 one example of a calabi-yau space.

to put it all together, you should now imagine replacing each of the spheres in figure 8.7—
which represented two curled-up dimensions—with a calabi-yau space. that is, at every point in the
three  familiar  extended  dimensions,  string  theory  claims  that  there  are  six  hitherto  unanticipated
dimensions, tightly curled up into one of these rather complicated-looking shapes, as illustrated in
figure  8.10.  these  dimensions  are  an  integral  and  ubiquitous  part  of  the  spatial  fabric;  they  exist
everywhere. for instance, if you sweep your hand in a large arc, you are moving not only through the
three  extended  dimensions,  but  also  through  these  curled-up  dimensions.  of  course,  because  the
curled-up  dimensions  are  so  small,  as  you  move  your  hand  you  circumnavigate  them  an  enormous
number of times, repeatedly returning to your starting point. their tiny extent means that there is not
much room for a large object like your hand to move—it all averages out so that after sweeping your
arm,  you  are  completely  unaware  of  the  journey  you  took  through  the  curled-up  calabi-yau
dimensions.

figure 8.10 according to string theory, the universe has extra dimensions curled up into a calabi-
yau shape.

this is a stunning feature of string theory. but if you are practically minded, you are bound to
bring the discussion back to an essential and concrete issue. now that we have a better sense of what
the extra dimensions look like, what are the physical properties that emerge from strings that vibrate
through them, and how do these properties compare with experimental observations? this is string
theory's $64,000 question.

chapter 9

the smoking gun: experimental signatures

nothing would please string theorists more than to proudly present the world with a list of detailed,
experimentally testable predictions. certainly, there is no way to establish that any theory describes
our  world  without  subjecting  its  predictions  to  experimental  verification.  and  no  matter  how
compelling a picture string theory paints, if it does not accurately describe our universe, it will be no
more relevant than an elaborate game of dungeons and dragons.

edward  witten  is  fond  of  declaring  that  string  theory  has  already  made  a  dramatic  and
experimentally  confirmed  prediction:  "string  theory  has  the  remarkable  property  of predicting
gravity."1 what witten means by this is that both newton and einstein developed theories of gravity
because their observations of the world clearly showed them that gravity exists, and that, therefore, it
required an accurate and consistent explanation. on the contrary, a physicist studying string theory—
even if he or she was completely unaware of general relativity—would be inexorably led to it by the
string framework. through its massless spin-2 graviton pattern of vibration, string theory has gravity
thoroughly sewn into its theoretical fabric. as witten has said, "the fact that gravity is a consequence
of  string  theory  is  one  of  the  greatest  theoretical  insights  ever."2  in  acknowledging  that  this
"prediction" is more precisely labeled a "postdiction" because physicists had discovered theoretical
descriptions of gravity before they knew of string theory, witten points out that this is a mere accident
of history on earth. in other advanced civilizations in the universe, witten fancifully argues, it is quite
possible  that  string  theory  was  discovered  first,  and  a  theory  of  gravity  found  as  a  stunning
consequence.

since  we  are  bound  to  the  history  of  science  on  our  planet,  there  are  many  who  find  this
postdiction of gravity unconvincing experimental confirmation of string theory. most physicists would
be far happier with one of two things: a bona fide prediction from string theory that experimentalists
could confirm, or a postdiction of some property of the world (like the mass of the electron or the
existence of three families of particles) for which there is currently no explanation. in this chapter we
will discuss how far string theorists have gone toward reaching these goals.

ironically,  we  will  see  that  although  string  theory  has  the  potential  to  be the  most  predictive
theory  that  physicists  have  ever  studied—a  theory  that  has  the  capacity  to  explain  the  most
fundamental of nature's properties—physicists have not as yet been able to make predictions with the
precision necessary to confront experimental data. like a child who receives his or her dream gift for
christmas but can't quite get it to work because a few pages of the instructions are missing, today's
physicists are in possession of what may well be the holy grail of modern science, but they can't
unleash  its  full  predictive  power  until  they  succeed  in writing  the  full  instruction  manual.
nevertheless, as we discuss in this chapter, with a bit of luck, one central feature of string theory
could  receive  experimental  verification  within  the  next  decade. and  with  a  good  deal  more  luck,
indirect fingerprints of the theory could be confirmed at any moment.

crossfire

is string theory right? we don't know. if you share the belief that the laws of physics should not be
fragmented into those that govern the large and those that govern the small, and if you also believe that
we should not rest until we have a theory whose range of applicability is limitless, string theory is the
only  game  in  town.  you  might  well  argue,  though,  that  this  highlights  only  physicists'  lack  of
imagination  rather  than  some  fundamental  uniqueness  of  string  theory.  perhaps. you  might  further
argue that, like the man searching for his lost keys solely under a street light, physicists are huddled
around string theory merely because the vagaries of scientific history have shed one random ray of
insight  in  this  direction.  maybe.  and,  if  you're  either  relatively  conservative  or  fond  of  playing
devil's advocate, you might even say that physicists have no business wasting time on a theory that
postulates a new feature of nature some hundred million billion times smaller than anything we can
directly probe experimentally.

if you voiced these complaints in the 1980s when string theory first made its splash, you would
have been joined by some of the most respected physicists of our age. for instance, in the mid-1980s
nobel  prize–winning  harvard  physicist  sheldon  glashow,  together  with  physicist  paul  ginsparg,
then also at harvard, publicly disparaged string theory's lack of experimental accessibility:

in lieu of the traditional confrontation between theory and experiment, superstring theorists
pursue an inner harmony, where elegance, uniqueness and beauty define truth. the theory
depends  for  its  existence  upon  magical  coincidences,  miraculous  cancellations  and
relations  among  seemingly  unrelated  (and  possibly  undiscovered)  fields  of  mathematics.
are  these  properties  reasons  to  accept  the  reality  of  superstrings?  do  mathematics  and
aesthetics supplant and transcend mere experiment?3

elsewhere, glashow went on to say,

superstring theory is so ambitious that it can only be totally right, or totally wrong. the
only problem is that the mathematics is so new and difficult that we won't know which for
decades to come.4

and he even questioned whether string theorists should "be paid by physics departments and allowed
to pervert impressionable students," warning that string theory was was undermining science, much as
medieval theology did during the middle ages.5

richard feynman, shortly before he died, made it clear that he did not believe that string theory
the unique  cure  for  the  problems—the  pernicious  infinities,  in  particular—besetting  a

was 
harmonious merger of gravity and quantum mechanics:

my feeling has been—and i could be wrong—that there is more than one way to skin a
cat. i don't think that there's only one way to get rid of the infinities. the fact that a theory
gets rid of infinities is to me not a sufficient reason to believe its uniqueness.6

and howard georgi, glashow's eminent harvard colleague and collaborator, was also a vociferous
string critic in the late 1980s:

if  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  beguiled  by  the  siren  call  of  the  "ultimate"  unification  at
distances  so  small  that  our  experimental  friends  cannot  help  us,  then  we  are  in  trouble,
because we will lose that crucial process of pruning of irrelevant ideas which distinguishes
physics from so many other less interesting human activities.7

as with many issues of great importance, for each of these naysayers, there is an enthusiastic
supporter. witten has said that when he learned how string theory incorporates gravity and quantum
mechanics, it was "the greatest intellectual thrill" of his life.8 cumrun vafa, a leading string theorist
from harvard university, has said that "string theory is definitely revealing the deepest understanding
of the universe which we have ever had."9 and nobel prize–winner murray gell-mann has said that
string theory is "a fantastic thing" and that he expects that some version of string theory will someday
be the theory of the whole world.10

as you can see, the debate is fueled in part by physics and in part by distinct philosophies about
how  physics  should  be  done.  the  "traditionalists"  want  theoretical  work  to  be  closely  tied  to
experimental observation, largely in the successful research mold of the last few centuries. but others
think that we are ready to tackle questions that are beyond our present technological ability to test
directly.

different philosophies notwithstanding, during the past decade much of the criticism of string

theory has subsided. glashow attributes this to two things. first, he notes that in the mid-1980s,

string theorists were enthusiastically and exuberantly proclaiming that they would shortly
answer all questions in physics. as they are now more prudent with their enthusiasm, much
of my criticism in the 1980s is no longer that relevant.11

second, he also points out,

we non–string theorists have not made any progress whatsoever in the last decade. so the
argument  that  string  theory  is  the  only  game  in  town  is  a  very  strong  and  powerful  one.
there are questions that will not be answered in the framework of conventional quantum
field theory. that much is clear. they may be answered by something else, and the only
something else i know of is string theory.12

georgi reflects back on the 1980s in much the same way:

at various times in its early history, string theory has gotten oversold. in the intervening
years i have found that some of the ideas of string theory have led to interesting ways of
thinking about physics which have been useful to me in my own work. i am much happier
now to see people spending their time on string theory since i can now see how something
useful will come out of it.13

theorist david gross, a leader in both conventional and string physics, has eloquently summed up the
situation in the following way:

it used to be that as we were climbing the mountain of nature the experimentalists would

lead the way. we lazy theorists would lag behind. every once in a while they would kick
down an experimental stone which would bounce off our heads. eventually we would get
the idea and we would follow the path that was broken by the experimentalists. once we
joined our friends we would explain to them what the view was and how they got there.
that was the old and easy way (at least for theorists) to climb the mountain. we all long for
the return of those days. but now we theorists might have to take the lead. this is a much
more lonely enterprise.14

string theorists have no desire for a solo trek to the upper reaches of mount nature; they would
far  prefer  to  share  the  burden  and  the  excitement  with  experimental  colleagues.  it  is  merely  a
technological mismatch in our current situation—a historical asynchrony—that the theoretical ropes
and  crampons  for  the  final  push  to  the  top  have  at  least  been  partially  fashioned,  while  the
experimental ones do not yet exist. but this does not mean that string theory is fundamentally divorced
from experiment. rather, string theorists have high hopes of "kicking down a theoretical stone" from
the ultra-high-energy mountaintop to experimentalists working at a lower base camp. this is a prime
goal of present-day research in string theory. no stones have as yet been dislodged from the summit to
be  sent  hurtling  down,  but,  as  we  now  discuss,  a  few  tantalizing  and  promising  pebbles  certainly
have.

the road to experiment

without monumental technological breakthroughs, we will never be able to focus on the tiny length
scales necessary to see a string directly. physicists can probe down to a billionth of a billionth of a
meter  with  accelerators  that  are  roughly  a  few  miles  in  size.  probing  smaller  distances  requires
higher energies and this means larger machines capable of focusing that energy on a single particle.
as the planck length is some 17 orders of magnitude smaller than what we can currently access, using
today's technology we would need an accelerator the size of the galaxy to see individual strings. in
fact,  shmuel  nussinov  of  tel  aviv  university  has  shown  that  this  rough  estimate  based  on
straightforward  scaling  is  likely  to  be  overly  optimistic;  his  more  careful  study  indicates  that  we
would require an accelerator the size of the whole universe. (the energy required to probe matter at
the planck length is roughly equal to a thousand kilowatt-hours—the energy needed to run an average
air  conditioner  for  about  one  hundred  hours—and  so  is  not  particularly  outlandish.  the  seemingly
insurmountable technological challenge is to focus all of this energy on a single particle, that is, on a
single  string.)  as  the  u.s.  congress  ultimately  canceled  funding  for  the  superconducting
supercollider—an  accelerator  a  "mere"  54  miles  in  circumference—don't  hold  your  breath  while
waiting  for  the  money  for  a  planck-probing  accelerator.  if  we  are  going  to  test  string  theory
experimentally,  it  will  have  to  be  in  an  indirect  manner.  we  will  have  to  determine  physical
implications of string theory that can be observed on length scales that are far larger than the size of a
string itself.15

in their groundbreaking paper, candelas, horowitz, strominger, and witten took the first steps
toward this goal. they not only found that the extra dimensions in string theory must be curled up into
a  calabi-yau  shape,  but  they  also  worked  out  some  of  the  implications  this  has  on  the  possible
patterns  of  string  vibrations.  one  central  result  they  found  highlights  the  amazingly  unexpected
solutions string theory offers to long-standing particle-physics problems.

recall that the elementary particles that physicists have found fall into three families of identical
organization, with the particles in each successive family being increasingly massive. the puzzling
question for which there was no insight prior to string theory is, why families and why three? here is
string theory's proposal. a typical calabi-yau shape contains  holes that are analogous to those found
at the center of a phonograph record, or a doughnut, or a "multidoughnut", as shown in figure 9.1. in
the higher-dimensional calabi-yau context, there are actually a variety of different types of holes that
can arise—holes which themselves can have a variety of dimensions ("multidimensional holes")—but
figure 9.1 conveys the basic idea. candelas, horowitz, strominger, and witten closely examined the
effect that these holes have on the possible patterns of string vibration, and here is what they found.

there is a family of lowest-energy string vibrations associated with each hole in the calabi-yau
portion of space. because the familiar elementary particles should correspond to the lowest-energy
oscillatory  patterns,  the  existence  of  multiple  holes—somewhat  like  those  in  the  multidoughnut—
means that the patterns of string vibrations will fall into multiple families. if the curled-up calabi-
yau has three holes, then we will find three families of elementary particles. 16 and so, string theory
proclaims that the family organization observed experimentally, rather than being some unexplainable
feature of either random or divine origin, is a reflection of the number of holes in the geometrical
shape comprising the extra dimensions! this is the kind of result that makes a physicist's heart skip a
beat.

figure 9.1 a doughnut, or torus, and its multihandled cousins.

you might think that the number of holes in the curled-up planck-sized dimensions—mountaintop
physics par  excellence—has  now  kicked  an  experimentally  testable  stone  down  to  accessible
energies. after all, experimentalists can establish—in fact, already have established—the number of
particle families: 3. unfortunately, the number of holes contained in each of the tens of thousands of
known calabi-yau shapes spans a wide range. some have 3. but others have 4, 5, 25, and so on—
some even have as many as 480 holes. the problem is that at present no one knows how to deduce
from the equations of string theory which of the calabi-yau shapes constitutes the extra spatial
dimensions. if we could find the principle that allows the selection of one calabi-yau shape from the
numerous possibilities, then indeed a stone from the mountaintop would go tumbling down into the
experimentalists' camp. if the particular calabi-yau shape singled out by the equations of the theory
were  to  have  three  holes,  we  would  have  found  an  impressive  postdiction  from  string  theory
explaining  a  known  feature  of  the  world  that  is  otherwise  completely  mysterious.  but  finding  the
principle  for  choosing  among  calabi-yau  shapes  is  a  problem  that  as  yet  remains  unsolved.
nevertheless—and this is the important point—we see that string theory provides the potential for
answering this basic puzzle of particle physics, and this in itself is substantial progress.

the number of families is but one experimental consequence of the geometrical form of the extra

dimensions. through their effect on possible patterns of string vibrations, other consequences of the
extra dimensions include the detailed properties of the force and matter particles. as one primary
example, subsequent work by strominger and witten showed that the masses of the particles in each
family depend upon—hang on, this is a bit tricky—the way in which the boundaries of the various
multidimensional holes in the calabi-yau shape intersect and overlap with one another. it's hard to
visualize, but the idea is that as strings vibrate through the extra curled-up dimensions, the precise
arrangement of the various holes and the way in which the calabi-yau shape folds around them has a
direct  impact  on  the  possible  resonant  patterns  of  vibration.  although  the  details  get  difficult  to
follow and are really not all that essential, what is important is that, as with the number of families,
string theory can provide us with a framework for answering questions—such as why the electron and
other  particles  have  the  masses  they  do—on  which  previous  theories  are  completely  silent.  once
again, though, carrying through with such calculations requires that we know which calabi-yau space
to take for the extra dimensions.

the  preceding  discussion  gives  some  idea  of  how  string  theory  may  one  day  explain  the
properties of the matter particles recorded in table 1.1. string theorists believe that a similar story
will one day also explain the properties of the messenger particles of the fundamental forces, listed in
table 1.2. that is, as strings twist and vibrate while meandering through the extended and curled-up
dimensions, a small subset of their vast oscillatory repertoire consists of vibrations with spin equal to
1 or 2. these are the candidate force-carrying string-vibrational states. regardless of the shape of the
calabi-yau space, there is always one vibrational pattern that is massless and has spin-2; we identify
this pattern as the graviton. the precise list of spin-1 messenger particles—their number, the strength
of the force they convey, the gauge symmetries they respect—though, does depend crucially on the
precise geometrical form of the curled-up dimensions. and so, once again, we come to realize that
string  theory  provides  a  framework  for  explaining  the  observed  messenger-particle  content  of  our
universe,  that  is,  for  explaining  the  properties  of  the  fundamental  forces,  but  that  without  knowing
exactly which calabi-yau shape the extra dimensions are curled into, we cannot make any definitive
predictions or postdictions (beyond witten's remark regarding the postdiction of gravity).

why can't we figure out which is the "right" calabi-yau shape? most string theorists blame this
on the inadequacy of the theoretical tools currently being used to analyze string theory. as we shall
discuss in some detail in chapter 12, the mathematical framework of string theory is so complicated
that physicists have been able to perform only approximate calculations through a formalism known
as perturbation theory. in this approximation scheme, each possible calabi-yau shape appears to be
on equal footing with every other; none is fundamentally singled out by the equations. and since the
physical  consequences  of  string  theory  depend  sensitively  on  the  precise  form  of  the  curled-up
dimensions,  without  the  ability  to  select  one  calabi-yau  space  from  the  many,  no  definitive
experimentally testable conclusions can be drawn. a driving force behind present-day research is to
develop theoretical methods that transcend the approximate approach in the hope that, among other
benefits,  we  will  be  led  to  a  unique  calabi-yau  shape  for  the  extra  dimensions.  we  will  discuss
progress along these lines in chapter 13.

exhausting possibilities

so  you  might  ask:  even  though  we  can't  as  yet  figure  out  which  calabi-yau  shape  string  theory
selects, does any choice yield physical properties that agree with what we observe? in other words,

if we were to work out the corresponding physical properties associated with each and every calabi-
yau  shape  and  collect  them  in  a  giant  catalog,  would  we  find  any  that  match  reality?  this  is  an
important question, but, for two main reasons, it is also a hard one to answer fully.

a sensible start is to focus only on those calabi-yau shapes that yield three families. this cuts
down the list of viable choices considerably, although many still remain. in fact, notice that we can
deform a multihandled doughnut from one shape to a slew of others—an infinite variety, in fact—
without changing the number of holes it contains. in figure 9.2 we illustrate one such deformation of
the bottom shape from figure 9.1. in much the same way, we can start with a three-holed calabi-yau
space  and  smoothly  deform  its  shape  without  changing  the  number  of  holes,  again  through  what
amounts  to  an  infinite  sequence  of  shapes.  (when  we  mentioned  earlier  that  there  were  tens  of
thousands  of  calabi-yau  shapes,  we  were  already  grouping  together  all  those  shapes  that  can  be
changed into one another by such smooth deformations, and we were counting the whole group as one
calabi-yau  space.)  the  problem  is  that  the  detailed  physical  properties  of  string  vibrations,  their
masses and their response to forces, are very much affected by such detailed changes in shape, but
once again, we have no means of selecting one possibility over any other. and no matter how many
graduate students physics professors might set to work, it's just not possible to figure out the physics
corresponding to an infinite list of different shapes.

figure 9.2 the shape of a multihandled doughnut can be deformed in many ways, one of which is
illustrated here, without changing the number of holes it contains.

this  realization  has  led  string  theorists  to  examine  the  physics  resulting  from  a  sample  of
possible  calabi-yau  shapes.  even  here,  however,  life  is  not  completely  smooth  sailing.  the
approximate  equations  that  string  theorists  currently  use  are  not  powerful  enough  to  work  out  the
resulting physics fully for any given choice of calabi-yau shape. they can take us a long way toward
understanding, in the sense of a ballpark estimate, the properties of the string vibrations that we hope
will align with the particles we observe. but precise and definitive physical conclusions, such as the
mass of the electron or the strength of the weak force, require equations that are far more exact than
the present approximate framework. recall from chapter 6—and the price is right  example—that
the  "natural"  energy  scale  of  string  theory  is  the  planck  energy,  and  it  is  only  through  extremely
delicate cancellations that string theory yields vibrational patterns with masses in the vicinity of those
of the known matter and force particles. delicate cancellations require precise calculations because
even small errors have a profound impact on accuracy. as we will discuss in chapter 12, during the
mid-1990s  physicists  have  made  significant  progress  toward  transcending  the  present  approximate
equations, although there is still far to go.

so where do we stand? well, even with the stumbling block of having no fundamental criteria by
which to select one calabi-yau shape over any other, as well as not having all the theoretical tools
necessary to extract the observable consequences of such a choice fully, we can still ask whether any
of the choices in the calabi-yau catalog gives rise to a world that is in even rough agreement with
observation.  the  answer  to  this  question  is  quite  encouraging. although  most  of  the  entries  in  the

calabi-yau catalog yield observable consequences significantly different from our world (different
numbers  of  particle  families,  different  number  and  types  of  fundamental  forces,  among  other
substantial deviations), a few entries in the catalog yield physics that is qualitatively close to what
we  actually  observe.  that  is,  there are  examples  of  calabi-yau  spaces  that,  when  chosen  for  the
curled-up dimensions required by string theory, give rise to string vibrations that are closely akin to
the particles of the standard model. and, of prime importance, string theory successfully stitches the
gravitational force into this quantum-mechanical framework.

with our present level of understanding, this situation is the best we could have hoped for. if
many of the calabi-yau shapes were in rough agreement with experiment, the link between a specific
choice and the physics we observe would be less compelling. many choices could fit the bill and
hence  none  would  appear  to  be  singled  out,  even  from  an  experimental  perspective.  on  the  other
hand,  if  none  of  the  calabi-yau  shapes  came  even  remotely  close  to  yielding  observed  physical
properties, it would seem that string theory, although a beautiful theoretical framework, could have no
relevance for our universe. finding a small number of calabi-yau shapes that, with our present, fairly
coarse ability to determine detailed physical implications, appear to be well within the ballpark of
acceptability is an extremely encouraging outcome.

explaining the elementary matter and force particle properties would be among the greatest—if
not the greatest—of scientific achievements. nevertheless, you might ask whether there are any string
theoretic pre-  dictions—as  opposed  to postdictions—that  experimental  physicists  could  attempt  to
confirm, either now or in the foreseeable future. there are.

superparticles

the theoretical hurdles currently preventing us from extracting detailed string predictions force us to
search  for generic, rather than specific, aspects of a universe consisting of strings. generic in this
context refers to characteristics that are so fundamental to string theory that they are fairly insensitive
to, if not completely independent of, those detailed properties of the theory that are now beyond our
theoretical purview. such characteristics can be discussed with confidence, even with an incomplete
understanding of the full theory. in subsequent chapters we shall return to other examples, but for now
we focus on one: supersymmetry.

as  we  have  discussed,  a  fundamental  property  of  string  theory  is  that  it  is  highly  symmetric,
incorporating  not  only  intuitive  symmetry  principles  but  respecting,  as  well,  the  maximal
mathematical extension of these principles, supersymmetry. this means, as discussed in chapter 7,
that patterns of string vibrations come in pairs—superpartner pairs—differing from each other by a
half unit of spin. if string theory is right, then some of the string vibrations will correspond to the
known  elementary  particles.  and  due  to  the  supersymmetric  pairing,  string  theory  makes  the
prediction  that  each  such  known  particle  will  have  a  superpartner.  we  can  determine  the  force
charges that each of these superpartner particles should carry, but we do not currently have the ability
to predict their masses. even so, the prediction that superpartners exist is a generic feature of string
theory;  it  is  a  property  of  string  theory  that  is  true,  independent  of  those  aspects  of  the  theory  we
haven't yet figured out.

no superpartners of the known elementary particles have ever been observed. this might mean
that they do not exist and that string theory is wrong. but many particle physicists feel that it means
that  the  superpartners  are  very  heavy  and  are  thus  beyond  our  current  capacity  to  observe

experimentally.  physicists  are  now  constructing  a  mammoth  accelerator  in  geneva,  switzerland,
called the large hadron collider. hopes run high that this machine will be powerful enough to find
the superpartner particles. the accelerator should be ready for operation before 2010, and shortly
thereafter supersymmetry may be confirmed experimentally. as schwarz has said, "supersymmetry
ought to be discovered before too long. and when that happens, it's going to be dramatic."17

you should bear in mind two things, though. even if superpartner particles are found, this fact
alone will not establish that string theory is correct. as we have seen, although supersymmetry was
discovered by studying string theory, it has also been successfully incorporated into point-particle
theories and is therefore not unique to its stringy origins. conversely, even if superpartner particles
are not found by the large hadron collider, this fact alone will not rule out string theory, since it
might be that the superpartners are so heavy that they are beyond the reach of this machine as well.

having said this, if in fact the superpartner particles are found, it will most definitely be strong

and exciting circumstantial evidence for string theory.

fractionally charged particles

another experimental signature of string theory, having to do with electric charge, is somewhat less
generic  than  superpartner  particles  but  equally  dramatic.  the  elementary  particles  of  the  standard
model have a very limited assortment of electric charges: the quarks and antiquarks have electric
charges of one-third or two-thirds, and their negatives, while the other particles have electric charges
of zero, one, or negative one. combinations of these particles account for all known matter in the
universe.  in  string  theory,  however,  it  is  possible  for  there  to  be  resonant  vibrational  patterns
corresponding to particles of significantly different electric charges. for instance, the electric charge
of a particle can take on exotic fractional values such as 1/5, 1/11, 1/13, or 1/53, among a variety of
other  possibilities.  these  unusual  charges  can  arise  if  the  curled-up  dimensions  have  a  certain
geometrical property: holes with the peculiar property that strings encircling them can disentangle
themselves only by wrapping around a specified number of times.18 the details are not particularly
important, but it turns out that the number of windings required to get disentangled manifests itself in
the allowed patterns of vibration by determining the denominator of the fractional charges.

some calabi-yau shapes have this geometrical property while others do not, and for this reason
the possibility of unusual electric-charge fractions is not as generic as the existence of superpartner
particles. on the other hand, whereas the prediction of superpartners is not a unique property of string
theory, decades of experience have shown that there is no compelling reason for such exotic electric-
charge fractions to exist in any point-particle theory. they can be forced into a point-particle theory,
but doing so would be as natural as the proverbial bull in a china shop. their possible emergence
from simple geometrical properties that the extra dimensions can have makes these unusual electric
charges a natural experimental signature for string theory.

as with the situation with superpartners, no such exotically charged particles have ever been
observed, and our understanding of string theory does not allow for a definitive prediction of their
masses should the extra dimensions have the correct properties to generate them. one explanation for
not seeing them, again, is that if they do exist, their masses must be beyond our present technological
means—in fact, it is likely that their masses would be on the order of the planck mass. but should a
future experiment come across such exotic electric charges, it would constitute very strong evidence
for string theory.

some longer shots

there are yet other ways in which evidence for string theory might be found. for example, witten has
pointed out the long-shot possibility that astronomers might one day see a direct signature of string
theory in the data they collect from observing the heavens. as encountered in chapter 6, the size of a
string is typically the planck length, but strings that are more energetic can grow substantially larger.
the energy of the big bang, in fact, would have been high enough to produce a few macroscopically
large  strings  that,  through  cosmic  expansion,  might  have  grown  to  astronomical  scales.  we  can
imagine that now or sometime in the future, a string of this sort might sweep across the night sky,
leaving an unmistakable and measurable imprint on data collected by astronomers (such as a small
shift in the cosmic microwave background temperature; see chapter 14). as witten says, "although
somewhat fanciful, this is my favorite scenario for confirming string theory as nothing would settle the
issue quite as dramatically as seeing a string in a telescope."19

closer to earth, there are other possible experimental signatures of string theory that have been
put forward. here are five examples. first, in table 1.1 we noted that we do not know if neutrinos
are just very light, or if in fact they are exactly massless. according to the standard model, they are
massless,  but  not  for  any  particularly  deep  reason.  a  challenge  to  string  theory  is  to  provide  a
compelling explanation of present and future neutrino data, especially if experiments ultimately show
that neutrinos do have a tiny but nonzero mass. second, there are certain hypothetical processes that
are forbidden by the standard model, but that may be allowed by string theory. among these are the
possible  disintegration  of  the  proton  (don't  worry,  such  disintegration,  if  true,  would  happen  very
slowly) and the possible transmutations and decays of various combinations of quarks, in violation of
certain long-established properties of point-particle quantum field theory.20 these kinds of processes
are  especially  interesting  because  their  absence  from  conventional  theory  makes  them  sensitive
signals  of  physics  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  without  invoking  new  theoretical  principles.  if
observed,  any  one  of  these  processes  would  provide  fertile  ground  for  string  theory  to  offer  an
explanation. third, for certain choices of the calabi-yau shape there are particular patterns of string
vibration that can effectively contribute new, tiny, long-range force fields. should the effects of any
such  new  forces  be  discovered,  they  might  well  reflect  some  of  the  new  physics  of  string  theory.
fourth,  as  we  note  in  the  next  chapter,  astronomers  have  collected  evidence  that  our  galaxy  and
possibly the whole of the universe is immersed in a bath of dark matter, the identity of which has yet
to be determined. through its many possible patterns of resonant vibration, string theory suggests a
number  of  candidates  for  the  dark  matter;  the  verdict  on  these  candidates  must  await  future
experimental results establishing the detailed properties of the dark matter.

and  finally,  a  fifth  possible  means  of  connecting  string  theory  to  observations  involves  the
cosmological  constant—remember,  as  discussed  in  chapter  3,  this  is  the  modification  einstein
temporarily  imposed  on  his  original  equations  of  general  relativity  to  ensure  a  static  universe.
although  the  subsequent  discovery  that  the  universe  is  expanding  led  einstein  to  retract  the
modification,  physicists  have  since  realized  that  there  is  no  explanation  for why  the  cosmological
constant should be zero. in fact, the cosmological constant can be interpreted as a kind of overall
energy  stored  in  the  vacuum  of  space,  and  hence  its  value  should  be  theoretically  calculable  and
experimentally  measurable.  but,  to  date,  such  calculations  and  measurements  lead  to  a  colossal
mismatch:  observations  show  that  the  cosmological  constant  is  either  zero  (as  einstein  ultimately
suggested) or quite small; calculations indicate that quantum-mechanical fluctuations in the vacuum of
empty  space  tend  to generate a nonzero cosmological constant whose value is some 120 orders of

magnitude  (a  1  followed  by  120  zeros)  larger  than  experiment  allows!  this  presents  a  wonderful
challenge  and  opportunity  for  string  theorists:  can  calculations  in  string  theory  improve  on  this
mismatch and explain why the cosmological constant is zero, or if experiments do ultimately establish
that its value is small but nonzero, can string theory provide an explanation? should string theorists be
able to rise to this challenge—as yet they have not—it would provide a compelling piece of evidence
in support of the theory.

an appraisal

the history of physics is filled with ideas that when first presented seemed completely untestable but,
through various unforeseen developments, were ultimately brought within the realm of experimental
verifiability. the notion that matter is made of atoms, pauli's hypothesis that there are ghostly neutrino
particles, and the possibility that the heavens are dotted with neutron stars and black holes are three
prominent ideas of precisely this sort—ideas that we now embrace fully but that, at their inception,
seemed more like musings of science fiction than aspects of science fact.

the motivation for introducing string theory is at least as compelling as any of these three ideas
—in fact, string theory has been hailed as the most important and exciting development in theoretical
physics since the discovery of quantum mechanics. this comparison is particularly apt because the
history of quantum mechanics teaches us that revolutions in physics can easily take many decades to
reach  maturity.  and  compared  to  today's  string  theorists,  the  physicists  working  out  quantum
mechanics had a great advantage: quantum mechanics, even when only partially formulated, could
make  direct  contact  with  experimental  results.  even  so,  it  took  close  to  30  years  for  the  logical
structure of quantum mechanics to be worked out, and about another 20 years to incorporate special
relativity fully into the theory. we are now incorporating general relativity, a far more challenging
task, and, moreover, one that makes contact with experiment much more difficult. unlike those who
worked out quantum theory, today's string theorists do not have the shining light of nature—through
detailed experimental results—to guide them from one step to the next.

this  means  that  it's  conceivable  that  one  or  more  generations  of  physicists  will  devote  their
lives to the investigation and development of string theory without getting a shred of experimental
feedback.  the  substantial  number  of  physicists  the  world  over  who  are  vigorously  pursuing  string
theory  know  that  they  are  taking  a  risk:  that  a  lifetime  of  effort  might  result  in  an  inconclusive
outcome.  undoubtedly,  significant  theoretical  progress  will  continue,  but  will  it  be  sufficient  to
overcome present hurdles and yield definitive, experimentally testable predictions? will the indirect
tests we have discussed above result in a true smoking gun for string theory? these questions are of
central concern to all string theorists, but they are also questions about which nothing can really be
said. only the passage of time will reveal the answers. the beautiful simplicity of string theory, the
way in which it tames the conflict between gravity and quantum mechanics, its ability to unify all of
nature's  ingredients,  and  its  potential  of  limitless  predictive  power  all  serve  to  provide  rich
inspiration that makes the risk worth taking.

these  lofty  considerations  have  been  continually  reinforced  by  the  ability  of  string  theory  to
uncover  remarkably  new  physical  characteristics  of  a  string-based  universe—characteristics  that
reveal a subtle and deep coherence in the workings of nature. in the language introduced above, many
of these are generic features that, regardless of currently unknown details, will be basic properties of
a  universe  built  of  strings.  of  these,  the  most  astonishing  have  had  a  profound  effect  on  our  ever

evolving understanding of space and time.

part iv

string theory and the fabric of spacetime

chapter 10

quantum geometry

in  the  course  of  about  a  decade,  einstein  singlehandedly  overthrew  the  centuries-old  newtonian
framework and gave the world a radically new and demonstrably deeper understanding of gravity. it
does  not  take  much  to  get  experts  and  nonexperts  alike  to  gush  over  the  sheer  brilliance  and
monumental  originality  of  einstein's  accomplishment  in  fashioning  general  relativity.  nevertheless,
we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  favorable  historical  circumstances  that  strongly  contributed  to
einstein's success. foremost among these are the nineteenth-century mathematical insights of georg
bernhard riemann that firmly established the geometrical apparatus for describing curved spaces of
arbitrary  dimension.  in  his  famous  1854  inaugural  lecture  at  the  university  of  göttingen,  riemann
broke the chains of flat-space euclidean thought and paved the way for a democratic mathematical
treatment  of  geometry  on  all  varieties  of  curved  surfaces.  it  is  riemann's  insights  that  provide  the
mathematics for quantitatively analyzing warped spaces such as those illustrated in figures 3.4 and
3.6.  einstein's  genius  lay  in  recognizing  that  this  body  of  mathematics  was  tailor-made  for
implementing  his  new  view  of  the  gravitational  force.  he  boldly  declared  that  the  mathematics  of
riemann's geometry aligns perfectly with the physics of gravity.

but  now,  almost  a  century  after  einstein's  tour-de-force,  string  theory  gives  us  a  quantum-
mechanical description of gravity that, by necessity, modifies general relativity when the distances
involved become as short as the planck length. since riemannian geometry is the mathematical core
of  general  relativity,  this  means  that  it  too  must  be  modified  in  order  to  reflect  faithfully  the  new
short-distance physics of string theory. whereas general relativity asserts that the curved properties
of the universe are described by riemannian geometry, string theory asserts that this is true only if we
examine the fabric of the universe on large enough scales. on scales as small as the planck length a
new kind of geometry must emerge, one that aligns with the new physics of string theory. this new
geometrical framework is called quantum geometry.

unlike  the  case  of  riemannian  geometry,  there  is  no  ready-made  geometrical  opus  sitting  on
some mathematician's shelf that string theorists can adopt and put in the service of quantum geometry.
instead, physicists and mathematicians are now vigorously studying string theory and, little by little,
piecing  together  a  new  branch  of  physics  and  mathematics.  although  the  full  story  has  yet  to  be
written, these investigations have already uncovered many new geometrical properties of spacetime
entailed by string theory—properties that would almost certainly have thrilled even einstein.

the heart of riemannian geometry

if you jump on a trampoline, the weight of your body causes it to warp by stretching its elastic fibers.
this  stretching  is  most  severe  right  under  your  body  and  becomes  less  noticeable  toward  the
trampoline's edge. you can see this clearly if a familiar image such as the mona lisa is painted on the

trampoline. when the trampoline is not supporting any weight, the mona lisa looks normal. but when
you  stand  on  the  trampoline,  the  image  of  the  mona  lisa  becomes  distorted,  especially  the  part
directly under your body, as illustrated in figure 10.1.

this  example  cuts  to  the  heart  of  riemann's  mathematical  framework  for  describing  warped
shapes.  riemann,  building  on  earlier  insights  of  the  mathematicians  carl  friedrich  gauss,  nikolai
lobachevsky, janos bolyai, and others, showed that a careful analysis of the distances between all
locations  on  or  in  an  object  provides  a  means  of  quantifying  the  extent  of  its  curvature.  roughly
speaking, the greater the (nonuniform) stretching—the greater the deviation from the distance relations
on  a  flat  shape—the  greater  the  curvature  of  the  object.  for  example,  the  trampoline  is  most
significantly stretched right under your body and therefore the distance relations between points in
this area are most severely distorted. this region of the trampoline, therefore, has the largest amount
of  curvature,  in  line  with  what  you  expect,  since  this  is  where  the  mona  lisa  suffers  the  greatest
distortion, yielding the hint of a grimace at the corner of her customary enigmatic smile.

figure 10.1 when standing on the mona lisa trampoline, the image becomes most distorted under
your weight.

einstein  adopted  riemann's  mathematical  discoveries  by  giving  them  a  precise  physical
interpretation. he showed, as we discussed in chapter 3, that the curvature of spacetime embodies
the  gravitational  force.  but  let's  now  think  about  this  interpretation  a  little  more  closely.
mathematically,  the  curvature  of  spacetime—like  the  curvature  of  the  trampoline—reflects  the
distorted distance relations between its points. physically, the gravitational force felt by an object is
a direct reflection of this distortion. in fact, by making the object smaller and smaller, the physics and
the  mathematics  align  ever  more  precisely  as  we  get  closer  and  closer  to  physically  realizing  the
abstract  mathematical  concept  of  a  point.  but  string  theory  limits  how  precisely  riemann's
geometrical formalism can be realized by the physics of gravity, because there is a limit to how small
we can make any object. once you get down to strings, you can't go any further. the traditional notion
of  a  point  particle  does  not  exist  in  string  theory—an  essential  element  in  its  ability  to  give  us  a
quantum theory of gravity. this concretely shows us that riemann's geometrical framework, which
relies fundamentally upon distances between points, is modified on ultramicroscopic scales by string
theory.

this  observation  has  a  very  small  effect  on  ordinary  macroscopic  applications  of  general
relativity. in cosmological studies, for example, physicists routinely model whole galaxies as if they
are points, since their size, in relation to the whole of the universe, is extremely tiny. for this reason,
implementing riemann's geometrical framework in this crude manner proves to be a very accurate

approximation, as evidenced by the success of general relativity in a cosmological context. but in the
ultramicroscopic realm, the extended nature of the string ensures that riemann's geometry simply will
not  be  the  right  mathematical  formalism.  instead,  as  we  will  now  see,  it  must  be  replaced  by  the
quantum geometry of string theory, leading to dramatically new and unexpected properties.

a cosmological playground

according to the big bang model of cosmology, the whole of the universe violently emerged from a
singular  cosmic  explosion,  some  15  or  so  billion  years  ago.  today,  as  originally  discovered  by
hubble, we can see that the "debris" from this explosion, in the form of many billions of galaxies, is
still streaming outward. the universe is expanding. we do not know whether this cosmic growth will
continue forever or if there will come a time when the expansion slows to a halt and then reverses
itself,  leading  to  a  cosmic  implosion.  astronomers  and  astrophysicists  are  trying  to  settle  this
question experimentally, since the answer turns on something that in principle can be measured: the
average density of matter in the universe.

if  the  average  matter  density  exceeds  a  so-called critical  density  of  about  a  hundredth  of  a
billionth  of  a  billionth  of  a  billionth  (10-29)  of  a  gram  per  cubic  centimeter—about  five  hydrogen
atoms for every cubic meter of the universe—then a large enough gravitational force will permeate
the cosmos to halt and reverse the expansion. if the average matter density is less than the critical
value,  the  gravitational  attraction  will  be  too  weak  to  stop  the  expansion,  which  will  continue
forever.  (based  upon  your  own  observations  of  the  world,  you  might  think  that  the  average  mass
density of the universe greatly exceeds the critical value. but bear in mind that matter—like money—
tends to clump. using the average mass density of the earth, or the solar system, or even the milky
way galaxy as an indicator for that of the whole universe would be like using bill gates's net worth
as an indicator of the average earthling's finances. just as there are many people whose net worth
pales in comparison to that of bill gates, thereby diminishing the average enormously, there is a lot
of  nearly  empty  space  between  the  galaxies  that  drastically  lowers  the  overall  average  matter
density.)

by carefully studying the distribution of galaxies throughout space, astronomers can get a pretty
good handle on the average amount of visible matter in the universe. this turns out to be significantly
less than the critical value. but there is strong evidence, of both theoretical and experimental origin,
that  the  universe  is  permeated  with  dark  matter.  this  is  matter  that  does  not  participate  in  the
processes  of  nuclear  fusion  that  powers  stars  and  hence  does  not  give  off  light;  it  is  therefore
invisible  to  the  astronomer's  telescope.  no  one  has  figured  out  the  identity  of  the  dark  matter,  let
alone the precise amount that exists. the fate of our presently expanding universe, therefore, is as yet
unclear.

just for argument's sake, let's assume that the mass density does exceed the critical value and that
someday in the distant future the expansion will stop and the universe will begin to collapse upon
itself. all galaxies will start to approach one another slowly, and then as time goes by, their speed of
approach will increase until they rush together at blinding speed. you need to picture the whole of the
universe squeezing together into an ever shrinking cosmic mass. as in chapter 3, from a maximum
size of many billions of light-years, the universe will shrink to millions of light-years, every moment
gaining speed as everything is crushed together to the size of a single galaxy, and then to the size of a
single star, a planet, and down to the size of an orange, a pea, a grain of sand, and further, according

to general relativity, to the size of a molecule, an atom, and in a final inexorable cosmic crunch to no
size at all. according to conventional theory, the universe began with a bang from an initial state of
zero size, and if it has enough mass, it will end with a crunch to a similar state of ultimate cosmic
compression.

but when the distance scales involved are around the planck length or less, quantum mechanics
invalidates the equations of general relativity, as we are now well aware. we must instead make use
of  string  theory. and  so,  whereas  einstein's  general  relativity  allows  the  geometrical  form  of  the
universe  to  get  arbitrarily  small—in  exactly  the  same  way  that  the  mathematics  of  riemannian
geometry allows an abstract shape to take on as small a size as the intellect can imagine—we are led
to  ask  how  string  theory  modifies  the  picture. as  we  shall  now  see,  there  is  evidence  that  string
theory once again sets a lower limit to physically accessible distance scales and, in a remarkably
novel way, proclaims that the universe cannot be squeezed to a size shorter than the planck length in
any of its spatial dimensions.

based on the familiarity you now have with string theory, you might be tempted to hazard a guess
as to how this comes about. after all, you might argue that no matter how many points you pile up on
top of each other—point particles that is—their combined volume is still zero. by contrast, if these
particles are really strings, collapsed together in completely random orientations, they will fill out a
nonzero-sized  blob,  roughly  like  a  planck-sized  ball  of  entangled  rubber  bands.  if  you  made  this
argument, you would be on the right track, but you would be missing significant, subtle features that
string theory elegantly employs to suggest a minimum size to the universe. these features serve to
emphasize, in a concrete manner, the new stringy physics that comes into play and its resultant impact
on the geometry of spacetime.

to explain these important aspects, let's first call upon an example that pares away extraneous
details without sacrificing the new physics. instead of considering all ten of the spacetime dimensions
of string theory—or even the four extended spacetime dimensions we are familiar with—let's go back
to  the  garden-hose  universe.  we  originally  introduced  this  two-spatial-dimension  universe  in
chapter 8 in a prestring context to explain aspects of kaluza's and klein's insights in the 1920s. let's
now  use  it  as  a  "cosmological  playground"  to  explore  the  properties  of  string  theory  in  a  simple
setting;  we  will  shortly  use  the  insights  we  gain  to  better  understand  all  of  the  spatial  dimensions
string theory requires. toward this end, we imagine that the circular dimension of the garden-hose
universe starts out nice and plump but then shrinks to shorter and shorter size, approaching the form of
lineland—a simplified, partial version of the big crunch.

the  question  we  seek  to  answer  is  whether  the  geometrical  and  physical  properties  of  this
cosmic collapse have features that markedly differ between a universe based on strings and one based
on point particles.

the essential new feature

we do not have to search far to find the essential new string physics. a point particle moving in this
two-dimensional  universe  can  execute  the  kinds  of  motion  illustrated  in  figure  10.2:  it  can  move
along the extended dimension of the garden-hose, it can move along the curled-up part of the garden-
hose, or any combination of the two. a loop of string can undergo similar motion, with one difference
being  that  it  oscillates  as  it  moves  around  on  the  surface,  as  shown  in  figure  10.3(a).  this  is  a
distinction  we  have  already  discussed  in  some  detail:  the  oscillations  of  the  string  imbue  it  with

characteristics such as mass and force charges. although a crucial aspect of string theory, this is not
our present focus, since we already understand its physical implications.

instead, our present interest is in another difference between point-particle and string motion, a
difference directly dependent on the shape of the space through which the string is moving. since the
string is an extended object, there is another possible configuration beyond those already mentioned:
it can wrap around—lasso, so to speak—the circular part of the garden-hose universe, as shown in
figure  10.3(b).1  the  string  will  continue  to  slide  around  and  oscillate,  but  it  will  do  so  in  this
extended configuration. in fact, the string can wrap around the circular part of the space any number of
times, as also shown in figure 10.3(b), and again will execute oscillatory motion as it slides around.
when  a  string  is  in  such  a  wrapped  configuration,  we  say  that  it  is  in  a winding mode  of  motion.
clearly,  being  in  a  winding  mode  is  a  possibility  inherent  to  strings.  there  is  no  point-particle
counterpart.  we  now  seek  to  understand  the  implications  of  this  qualitatively  new  kind  of  string
motion on the string itself as well as on the geometrical properties of the dimension it wraps.

figure 10.2 point particles moving on a cylinder.

figure 10.3 strings can move on a cylinder in two different ways—in "unwrapped" or "wrapped"
configurations.

the physics of wound strings

throughout our previous discussion of string motion, we have focused on unwound strings. strings
that wrap around a circular component of space share almost all of the same properties as the strings
we have studied. their oscillations, just as those of their unwound counterparts, contribute strongly to
their  observed  properties.  the  essential  difference  is  that  a  wrapped  string  has  a minimum  mass,
determined by the size of the circular dimension and the number of times it wraps around. the string's
oscillatory motion determines a contribution in excess of this minimum.

it is not difficult to understand the origin of this minimum mass. a wound string has a minimum
length determined by the circumference of the circular dimension and the number of times the string
encircles it. the minimum length of a string determines its minimum mass: the longer this length, the
greater the mass, since there is more of it. since the circumference of a circle is proportional to its
radius, the minimum winding-mode masses are proportional to the radius of the circle being wrapped.
by using einstein's e = mc2 relating mass to energy, we can also say that the energy bound in a wound

string is proportional to the radius of the circular dimension. (unwrapped strings also have a tiny
minimum  length  since  if  they  didn't,  we  would  be  back  in  the  realm  of  point  particles.  the  same
reasoning  might  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  even  unwrapped  strings  have  a  minuscule  yet  nonzero
minimum mass. in a sense this is true, but the quantum-mechanical effects encountered in chapter 6—
remember the price is right, again—are able to exactly cancel this contribution to the mass. this is
how, we recall, unwrapped strings can yield the zero-mass photon, graviton, and the other massless
or near-massless particles, for example. wrapped strings are different in this regard.)

how does the existence of wrapped string configurations affect the geometrical properties of the
dimension  around  which  the  strings  wind?  the  answer,  first  recognized  in  1984  by  the  japanese
physicists keiji kikkawa and masami yamasaki, is bizarre and remarkable.

let's consider the last cataclysmic stages of our variant on the big crunch in the garden-hose
universe. as  the  radius  of  the  circular  dimension  shrinks  to  the  planck  length  and,  in  the  mold  of
general  relativity,  continues  to  shrink  to  yet  smaller  lengths,  string  theory  insists  upon  a  radical
reinterpretation  of  what  actually  happens.  string  theory  claims  that all  physical  processes  in  the
garden-hose universe in which the radius of the circular dimension is shorter than the planck length
and is decreasing are absolutely identical to physical processes in which the circular dimension is
longer  than  the  planck  length  and  increasing!  this  means  that  as  the  circular  dimension  tries  to
collapse through the planck length and head toward ever smaller size, its attempts are made futile by
string  theory,  which  turns  the  tables  on  geometry.  string  theory  shows  that  this  evolution  can  be
rephrased—exactly reinterpreted—as the circular dimension shrinking down to the planck length and
then proceeding to expand. string theory rewrites the laws of short-distance geometry so that what
previously appeared to be complete cosmic collapse is now seen to be a cosmic bounce. the circular
dimension  can  shrink  to  the  planck-length.  but  because  of  the  winding  modes,  attempts  to  shrink
further actually result in expansion. let's see why.

the spectrum of string states*

the new possibility of wound-string configurations implies that the energy of a string in the garden-
hose universe comes from two sources: vibrational motion and winding energy. from the legacy of
kaluza and klein, each depends on the geometry of the hose, that is, on the radius of its curled-up
circular  component,  but  with  a  distinctly  stringy  twist,  since  point  particles  cannot  wrap  around
dimensions.  our  first  task,  then,  will  be  to  determine  precisely  how  the  winding  and  vibrational
contributions to the energy of a string depend on the size of the circular dimension. for this purpose,
it proves convenient to separate the vibrational motion of strings into two categories: uniform  and
ordinary vibrations. ordinary vibrations refer to the usual oscillations we have discussed repeatedly,
such as those illustrated in figure 6.2; uniform vibrations refer to even simpler motion: the overall
motion of string as it slides from one position to another without changing its shape. all string motion
is a combination of sliding and oscillating—of uniform and ordinary vibrations—but for the present
discussion it is easier to separate them in this manner. in fact, the ordinary vibrations will not play a
central part in our reasoning, and we will therefore include their effects only after we have finished
giving the gist of the argument.

here are the two essential observations. first, uniform vibrational excitations of a string have
energies  that  are inversely  proportional  to  the  radius  of  the  circular  dimension.  this  is  a  direct
consequence of the quantum-mechanical uncertainty principle: a smaller radius more strictly confines

a string and therefore, through quantum-mechanical claustrophobia, increases the amount of energy in
its motion. so, as the radius of the circular dimension decreases, the energy of motion of the string
necessarily  increases—the  hallmark  feature  of  an  inverse  proportionality.  second,  as  found  in  the
preceding  section,  the  winding  mode  energies  are directly—not  inversely—proportional  to  the
radius. remember, this is because the minimum length of wound strings, and hence their minimum
energy, is proportional to the radius. these two observations establish that large values of the radius
imply large winding energies and small vibration energies, whereas small values of the radius imply
small winding energies and large vibration energies.

this leads us to the key fact: for any large circular radius of the garden-hose universe, there is
a corresponding small circular radius for which the winding energies of strings in the former universe
equal the vibration energies of strings in the latter, and vibration energies of strings in the former
equal winding energies of strings in the latter. as physical properties are sensitive to the total energy
of  a  string  configuration—and  not  to  how  the  energy  is  divided  between  vibration  and  winding
contributions—there  is no physical distinction  between  these geometrically distinct  forms  for  the
garden-hose  universe.  and  so,  strangely  enough,  string  theory  claims  that  there  is  no  difference
whatsoever between a "fat" garden-hose universe and a "thin" one.

it's a cosmic hedging of bets, somewhat akin to what you, as a smart investor, should do if faced
with the following puzzle. imagine you learn that the fate of two stocks trading on wall street—say, a
company  making  fitness  machines  and  a  company  making  heart-bypass  valves—are  inextricably
connected.  they  each  closed  trading  today  valued  at  one  dollar  per  share,  and  you  are  told  by  a
reliable  source  that  if  one  company's  stock  goes  up  the  other's  will  go  down,  and  vice  versa.
moreover, your source—who is completely trustworthy (but whose guidance might be crossing over
legal boundaries)—tells you that the next day's closing prices of these two companies are absolutely
certain to be inversely related to one another. that is, if one stock closes at $2 per share, the other
will close at $1/2 (50 cents) per share; if one stock closes at $10 per share, the other will close at
$1/10 (10 cents) per share, and so on. but the one thing your source can't tell you is which stock will
close high and which will close low. what do you do?

well, you immediately invest all of your money in the stock market, equally divided between the
shares of these two companies. as you can easily check by working out a few examples, no matter
what happens on the next day, your investment cannot lose value. at worse it can remain the same (if
both companies again close at $1), but any movement of share prices—consistent with your insider
information—will increase your holdings. for instance, if the fitness company closes at $4 and the
heart-valve  company  closes  at  $1/4  (25  cents),  their  combined  value  is  $4.25  (for  each  pair  of
shares), compared with $2 the previous day. furthermore, from the perspective of net worth, it does
not matter one bit whether the fitness company closes high and the heart-valve company low, or vice
versa.  if  you  care  only  about  the  total  amount  of  money,  these  two  distinct  circumstances  are
financially indistinguishable.

the situation in string theory is analogous in that the energy in string configurations comes from
two  sources—vibrations  and  windings—whose  contributions  to  the  total  energy  of  a  string  are
generally different. but, as we shall see in more detail below, certain pairs of distinct geometrical
circumstances—leading  to  high-winding-energy/low-vibration-energy  or  low-winding-energy/high-
vibration-energy—are physically  indistinguishable.  and,  unlike  the  financial  analogy  for  which
considerations beyond total wealth can distinguish between the two types of stock holdings, there is
absolutely no physical distinction between the two string scenarios.

actually, we shall see that to make the analogy with string theory tighter, we should consider

what would happen if you did not divide your money equally between the two companies in your
initial investment, but bought, say, 1,000 shares of the fitness company and 3,000 shares of the heart-
valve company. now the total value of your holdings does depend on which company closes high and
which closes low. for instance, if the stocks close at $10 (fitness) and 10 cents (heart-valve), your
initial investment of $4,000 will now be worth $10,300. if the reverse happens—the stocks close at
10 cents (fitness) and $10 (heart-valve)—your holdings will be worth $30,100—significantly more.

nevertheless,  the  inverse  relationship  between  the  closing  stock  prices  does  ensure  the
following. if a friend of yours invests exactly "opposite" to you—3,000 shares of the fitness company
and  1,000  shares  of  the  heart-valve  company—then  the  value  of  her  holdings  will  be  $10,300  if
stocks  close  valves-high/fitness-low  (the  same  as  your  holdings  in  the  fitness-high/valves-low
closing) and $30,100 if they close with fitness-high/valves-low (again, the same as your holdings in
the  reciprocal  situation).  that  is,  from  the  point  of  view  of  total  stock  value,  interchanging  which
stock closes high and which closes low is exactly compensated by interchanging the number of shares
you own of each company.

hold this last observation in mind as we now return to string theory and think about the possible
string energies in a specific example. imagine that the radius of the circular garden-hose dimension
is,  say,  ten  times  the  planck  length.  we  will  write  this  as  r  =  10. a  string  can  wrap  around  this
circular dimension one time, two times, three times, and so forth. the number of times a string wraps
around  the  circular  dimension  is  called  its winding  number.  the  energy  from  winding,  being
determined by the length of wound string, is proportional to the product of the radius and the winding
number. additionally, for any amount of winding, the string can undergo vibrational motion. as the
uniform  vibrations  we  are  currently  focusing  on  have  energies  that  are  inversely  dependent  on  the
radius, they are proportional to whole-number multiples of the reciprocal of the radius—1/r—which
in  this  case  is  one-tenth  of  the  planck  length.  we  call  this  whole  number  multiple  the vibration
number.2

as you can see, this situation is very similar to what we encountered on wall street, with the
winding and vibration numbers being direct analogs of the shares held in the two companies, while r
and 1/r are the analogs of the closing prices per share in each. now, just as you can easily calculate
the total value of your investment from the number of shares held in each company and the closing
prices,  we  can  calculate  the  total  energy  carried  by  a  string  in  terms  of  its  vibration  number,  its
winding number, and the radius. in table 10.1 we give a partial list of these total energies for various
string configurations, which we specify by their winding and vibration numbers, in a garden-hose
universe with radius r = 10.

a complete table would be infinitely long, since the winding and vibration numbers can take on
arbitrary  whole-number  values,  but  this  representative  piece  of  the  table  is  adequate  for  our
discussion.  we  see  from  the  table  and  our  remarks  that  we  are  in  a  high-winding-energy/low-
vibration-energy  situation:  winding  energies  come  in  multiples  of  10,  while  vibrational  energies
come in multiples of the smaller number 1/10.

now imagine that the radius of the circular dimension shrinks, say, from 10 to 9.2 to 7.1 and on
down to 3.4, 2.2, 1.1, .7, all the way to .1 (1/10), where, for our present discussion, it stops. in this
geometrically distinct form of the garden-hose universe we can compile an analogous table of string
energies: winding energies are now multiples of 1/10 while vibration energies are multiples of its
reciprocal, 10. the results are shown in table 10.2.

at first glance, the two tables might appear to be different. but closer inspection reveals that
although  arranged  in  a  different  order,  the  "total  energy"  columns  of  both  tables  have identical

entries.  to  find  the  corresponding  entry  in  table  10.2  for  a  chosen  entry  in  table  10.1,  one  must
simply interchange the vibration and winding numbers. that is, vibration and winding contributions
play complementary roles when the radius of the circular dimension changes from 10 to 1/10. and so,
as far as total string energies go, there is no distinction between these different sizes for the circular
dimension. just as the interchange of fitness-high/valves-low with valves-high/fitness-low is exactly
compensated by an interchange of the number of shares held in each company, interchange of radius
10  and  radius  1/10  is  exactly  compensated  by  the  interchange  of  vibration  and  winding  numbers.
moreover,  while  for  simplicity  we  have  focused  on  an  initial  radius  of r = 10 and its reciprocal
1/10, the conclusions drawn are the same for any choice of the radius and its reciprocal.3

vibration number winding number
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

total energy
1/10 + 10 = 10.1
1/10 + 20 = 20.1
1/10 + 30 = 30.1
1/10 + 40 = 40.1
2/10 + 10 = 10.2
2/10 + 20 = 20.2
2/10 + 30 = 30.2
2/10 + 40 = 40.2
3/10 + 10 = 10.3
3/10 + 20 = 20.3
3/10 + 30 = 30.3
3/10 + 40 = 40.3
4/10 + 10 = 10.4
4/10 + 20 = 20.4
4/10 + 30 = 30.4
4/10 + 40 = 40.4

table 10.1 sample vibration and winding configurations of a string moving in a universe shown in
figure  10.3,  with  radius r  =  10.  the  vibration  energies  contribute  in  multiples  of  1/10  and  the
winding energies contribute in multiples of 10, yielding the total energies listed. the energy unit is the
planck energy, so for example, 10.1 in the last column means 10.1 times the planck energy.

vibration number winding number
1
1
1
1

1
2
3
4

total energy
10 + 1/10 = 10.1
10 + 2/10 = 10.2
10 + 3/10 = 10.3
10 + 4/10 = 10.4

2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

20 + 1/10 = 20.1
20 + 2/10 = 20.2
20 + 3/10 = 20.3
20 + 4/10 = 20.4
30 + 1/10 = 30.1
30 + 2/10 = 30.2
30 + 3/10 = 30.3
30 + 4/10 = 30.4
40 + 1/10 = 40.1
40 + 2/10 = 40.2
40 + 3/10 = 40.3
40 + 4/10 = 40.4

table 10.2 as in table 10.1, except that the radius is now taken to be 1/10.

tables 10.1 and 10.2 are incomplete for two reasons. first, as mentioned, we have listed only a
few  of  the  infinite  possibilities  for  winding/vibration  numbers  that  a  string  can  assume.  this,  of
course, poses no problem—we could make the tables as long as our patience allows and would find
that the relation between them will continue to hold. second, beyond winding energy, we have so far
considered  only  energy  contributions  arising  from  the  uniform-vibrational  motion  of  a  string.  we
should now include the ordinary vibrations as well, since these give additional contributions to the
string's total energy and also determine the force charges it carries. the important point, however, is
that  investigations  have  revealed  that  these  contributions  do  not  depend  on  the  size  of  the  radius.
thus, even if we were to include these more detailed features of string attributes in tables 10.1 and
10.2,  the  tables  would  still  correspond  exactly,  since  the  ordinary  vibrational  contributions  affect
each  table  identically.  we  therefore  conclude  that  the  masses  and  the  charges  of  particles  in  a
garden-hose universe with radius r are completely identical to those in a garden-hose universe with
radius 1/r. and since these masses and force charges govern fundamental physics, there is no way to
distinguish physically these two geometrically distinct universes. any experiment done in one such
universe has a corresponding experiment that can be done in the other, leading to exactly the same
results.

a debate

george  and  gracie,  after  being  flattened  out  into  two-dimensional  beings,  take  up  residence  as
physics professors in the garden-hose universe. after setting up their competing laboratories, each
claims  to  have  determined  the  size  of  the  circular  dimension.  surprisingly,  although  each  has  a
reputation  for  carrying  out  research  with  great  precision,  their  conclusions  do  not  agree.  george
claims that the circular radius is r = 10 times the planck length, while gracie claims that the circular
radius is r = 1/10 times the planck length.

"gracie,"  says  george,  "based  on  my  string  theory  calculations,  i  know  that  if  the  circular

dimension has radius 10, then i should expect to see strings whose energies are listed in table 10.1. i
have done extensive experiments using the new planck energy accelerator and they have revealed that
this prediction is precisely confirmed. therefore, with confidence, i claim that the circular dimension
has radius r = 10." gracie, in defense of her claims, makes exactly the same remarks except for her
conclusion that the list of energies in table 10.2 is found, confirming that the radius is r = 1/10.

in a flash of insight, gracie shows george that the two tables, although arranged differently, are
actually  identical.  now  george,  who,  as  is  well  known,  reasons  a  bit  more  slowly  than  gracie,
replies, "how can this be? i know that different values for the radius give rise, through basic quantum
mechanics and the properties of wound strings, to different possible values for string energies and
string charges. if we agree on the latter, then we must agree on the radius."

gracie, using her newfound insight into string physics replies, "what you say is almost, but not
quite, correct. it is usually true that two different values for the radius give rise to different allowed
energies.  however,  in  the  special  circumstance  when  the  two  values  for  the  radius  are  inversely
related  to  one  another—like  10  and  1/10—then  the  allowed  energies  and  charges  are  actually
identical. you see, what you would call a winding mode i would call a vibration mode, and what you
would  call  a  vibration  mode  i  would  call  a  winding  mode.  but  nature  does  not  care  about  the
language we use. instead, physics is governed by the properties of the fundamental ingredients—the
particle masses (energies) and the force charges they carry. and whether the radius is r or 1/r, the
complete list of these properties for the fundamental ingredients in string theory is identical."

in  a  moment  of  bold  comprehension,  george  responds,  "i  think  i  understand.  although  the
detailed description you and i might give for strings may differ—whether they are wound around the
circular  dimension,  or  the  particulars  of  their  vibrational  behavior—the  complete  list  of  physical
characteristics they can attain is the same. therefore, since the physical properties of the universe
depend upon these properties of the basic constituents, there is no distinction, no way to differentiate,
between radii that are inversely related to one another." exactly.

three questions

at this point you might say, "look, if i was a little being in the garden-hose universe i would simply
measure the circumference of the hose with a tape measure and thereby unambiguously determine the
radius—no ifs, ands, or buts. so what is this nonsense about two indistinguishable possibilities with
different radii? furthermore, doesn't string theory do away with sub-planck distances, so why are we
even talking about circular dimensions with radii that are a fraction of the planck length? and finally,
while we are at it, who really cares about the two-dimensional garden-hose universe—what does all
this add up to when we include all dimensions?"

let's begin with the last question, as the answer will force us to come face to face with the first

two.

although our discussion has taken place in the garden-hose universe, we restricted ourselves to
one extended and one curled-up spatial dimension merely for simplicity. if we have three extended
spatial  dimensions  and  six  circular  dimensions—the  latter  being  the  simplest  of  all  calabi-yau
spaces—the conclusion is exactly the same. each of the circles has a radius that, if interchanged with
its reciprocal, yields a physically identical universe.

we can even take this conclusion one giant step further. in our universe, we observe three spatial
dimensions, each of which, according to astronomical observations, appears to extend for about 15

billion light-years (a light-year is about 6 trillion miles, so this distance is about 90 billion trillion
miles). as mentioned in chapter 8, nothing tells us what happens after that. we do not know whether
they continue on indefinitely or perhaps curve back on themselves in the shape of an enormous circle,
beyond  the  visual  sensitivity  of  state-of-the-art  telescopes.  if  the  latter  is  the  case,  an  astronaut
travelling out into space, continuously going in a fixed direction, would ultimately circle around the
universe—like magellan travelling around the earth—and wind up back at the initial starting point.

the familiar extended dimensions, therefore, may very well also be in the shape of circles and
hence subject to the r and 1/r physical identification of string theory. to put some rough numbers in,
if the familiar dimensions are circular then their radii must be about as large as the 15 billion light-
years mentioned above, which is about ten trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion (r=1061) times the
planck  length,  and  growing  as  the  universe  expands.  if  string  theory  is  right,  this  is  physically
identical to the familiar dimensions being circular with incredibly tiny radii of about 1/r=1/1061 =
10-61  times  the  planck  length! these  are  our  well-known  familiar  dimensions  in  an  alternate
description  provided  by  string  theory.  in  fact,  in  this  reciprocal  language,  these  tiny  circles  are
getting ever smaller as time goes by, since as r grows, 1/r shrinks. now we seem to have really gone
off the deep end. how can this possibly be true? how can a six-foot tall human being "fit" inside such
an unbelievably microscopic universe? how can such a speck of a universe be physically identical to
the great expanse we view in the heavens? furthermore, we are now led forcefully to the second of
our initial three questions: string theory was supposed to eliminate the ability to probe sub-planck
distances. but if a circular dimension has radius r whose length is larger than the planck length, its
reciprocal 1/r is necessarily a fraction of the planck length. so what is going on? the answer, which
will also address the first of our three questions, highlights an important and subtle aspect of space
and distance.

two interrelated notions of distance in string theory

distance is such a basic concept in our understanding of the world that it is easy to underestimate the
depth of its subtlety. with the surprising effects that special and general relativity have had on our
notions of space and time, and the new features arising from string theory, we are led to be a bit more
careful even in our definition of distance. the most meaningful definitions in physics are those that
are  operational—that  is,  definitions  that  provide  a  means,  at  least  in  principle,  for  measuring
whatever  is  being  defined. after  all,  no  matter  how  abstract  a  concept  is,  having  an  operational
definition allows us to boil down its meaning to an experimental procedure for measuring its value.

how  can  we  give  an  operational  definition  of  the  concept  of  distance?  the  answer  to  this
question  in  the  context  of  string  theory  is  rather  surprising.  in  1988,  the  physicists  robert
brandenberger of brown university and cumrun vafa of harvard university pointed out that if the
spatial shape of a dimension is circular, there are two different yet related operational definitions of
distance in string theory. each lays out a distinct experimental procedure for measuring distance and
is based, roughly speaking, on the simple principle that if a probe travels at a fixed and known speed
then we can measure a given distance by determining how long the probe takes to traverse it. the
difference between the two procedures is the choice of probe used. the first definition uses strings
that  are not wound around a circular dimension, whereas the second definition uses strings that are
wound. we see that the extended nature of the fundamental probe is responsible for there being two
natural operational definitions of distance in string theory. in a point-particle theory, for which there

is no notion of winding, there would be only one such definition.

how do the results of each procedure differ? the answer found by brandenberger and vafa is as
surprising as it is subtle. the rough idea underlying the result can be understood by appealing to the
uncertainty principle. unwound strings can move around freely and probe the full circumference of
the circle, a length proportional to r. by the uncertainty principle, their energies are proportional to
1/r (recall from chapter 6 the inverse relation between the energy of a probe and the distances to
which  it  is  sensitive).  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  seen  that  wound  strings  have  minimum  energy
proportional  to r;  as  probes  of  distances  the  uncertainty  principle  tells  us  that  they  are  therefore
sensitive to the reciprocal of this value, 1/r. the mathematical embodiment of this idea shows that if
each  is  used  to  measure  the  radius  of  a  circular  dimension  of  space,  unwound  string  probes  will
measure r while wound strings will measure 1/r, where, as before, we are measuring distances in
multiples of the planck length. the result of each experiment has an equal claim to being the radius of
the circle—what we learn from string theory is that using different probes to measure distance can
result in different answers. in fact, this property extends to all measurements of lengths and distances,
not just to determining the size of a circular dimension. the results obtained by wound and unwound
string probes will be inversely related to one another.4

if string theory describes our universe, why have we not encountered these two possible notions
of distance in any of our day-to-day or scientific endeavors? any time we talk about distance, we do
so in a manner that conforms to our experience of there being one concept of distance without any hint
of there being a second notion. why have we missed the alternative possibility? the answer is that
although there is a high degree of symmetry in our discussion, whenever r (and hence 1/r as well)
differ  significantly  from  the  value  1  (meaning,  again,  1  times  the  planck  length),  then  one  of  our
operational definitions proves extremely difficult to carry out while the other proves extremely easy
to carry out. in essence, we have always carried out the easy approach, completely unaware of there
being another possibility.

the discrepancy in difficulty between the two approaches is due to the very different masses of
the  probes  used—high-winding-energy/low-vibration-energy,  and  vice  versa—if  the  radius r  (and
hence 1/r as well) differs significantly from the planck length (that is, r = 1). "high" energy here, for
radii  that  are  vastly  different  from  the  planck  length,  corresponds  to  incredibly  massive  probes—
billions and billions of times heavier than the proton, for instance—while "low" energy corresponds
to probe masses at most a speck above zero. in such circumstances, there is a monumental difference
in difficulty between the two approaches, since even producing the heavy-string configurations is an
undertaking that, at present, is beyond our technological prowess. in practice, then, only one of the
two approaches is technologically feasible—the one involving the lighter of the two types of string
configurations.  this  is  the  one  used  implicitly  in  all  of  our  discussions  involving  distance
encountered to this point. this is the one that informs and hence meshes with our intuition.

putting  issues  of  practicality  aside,  in  a  universe  governed  by  string  theory  one  is  free  to
measure  distances  using  either  of  the  two  approaches.  when  astronomers  measure  the  "size  of  the
universe" they do so by examining photons that have traveled across the cosmos and have happened to
enter their telescopes. no pun intended, photons are the light string modes in this situation. the result
obtained is the 1061 times the planck length quoted earlier. if the three familiar spatial dimensions are
in fact circular and string theory is right, astronomers using vastly different (and currently nonexistent)
equipment, in principle, should be able to measure the extent of the heavens with heavy wound-string
modes and find a result that is the reciprocal of this huge distance. it is in this sense that we can think
of the universe as being either huge, as we normally do, or terribly minute. according to the light

string  modes,  the  universe  is  large  and  expanding;  according  to  the  heavy  modes  it  is  tiny  and
contracting.  there  is  no  contradiction  here;  instead,  we  have  two  distinct  but  equally  sensible
definitions  of  distance.  we  are  far  more  familiar  with  the  first  definition  due  to  technological
limitations, but, nevertheless, each is an equally valid concept.

now  we  can  answer  our  earlier  question  about  big  humans  in  a  little  universe.  when  we
measure  the  height  of  a  human  and  find  six  feet,  for  instance,  we  necessarily  use  the  light  string
modes. to compare their size to that of the universe, we must use the same measuring procedure and,
as above, this yields 15 billion light-years for the size of the universe, a result that is much larger than
six feet. asking how such a person can fit into the "tiny" universe as measured by the heavy string
modes is asking a meaningless question—it's comparing apples and oranges. since we now have two
concepts of distance—using light or heavy string probes—we must compare measurements made in
the same manner.

a minimum size

it's been a bit of a trek, but we are now set for the key point. if one does stick to measuring distances
"the easy way"—that is, using the lightest of the string modes instead of the heavy ones—the results
obtained will always be larger than the planck length. to see this, let's think through the hypothetical
big crunch for the three extended dimensions, assuming them to be circular. for argument's sake, let's
say that at the beginning of our thought experiment, unwound string modes are the light ones and by
using them it is determined that the universe has an enormously large radius and that it is shrinking in
time. as it shrinks, these unwound modes get heavier and the winding modes get lighter. when the
radius shrinks all the way to the planck length—that is, when r takes on the value 1—the winding and
vibration modes have comparable mass. the two approaches to measuring distance become equally
difficult to carry out and, moreover, each would yield the same result since 1 is its own reciprocal.

as the radius continues to shrink, the winding modes become lighter than the unwound modes
and hence, since we are always opting for the "easier approach," they should now be used to measure
distances. according to this method of measurement, which yields the reciprocal of that measured by
the  unwound  modes, the radius is larger than one times the planck length and increasing.  this
simply reflects that as r—the quantity measured by unwound strings—shrinks to 1 and continues to
get smaller, 1/r—the quantity measured by wound strings—grows to 1 and gets larger. therefore, if
one takes care to always use the light string modes—the "easy" approach to measuring distance—the
minimal value encountered is the planck length.

in  particular,  a  big  crunch  to  zero  size  is  avoided,  as  the  radius  of  the  universe  as  measured
using light string-mode probes is always larger than the planck length. rather than heading through the
planck length on to ever smaller size, the radius, as measured by the lightest string modes, decreases
to the planck length and then immediately starts to increase. the crunch is replaced by a bounce.

using light string modes to measure distances aligns with our conventional notion of length—the
one  that  was  around  long  before  the  discovery  of  string  theory.  it  is  according  to this  notion  of
distance, as seen in chapter 5, that we encountered insurmountable problems with violent quantum
undulations  if  sub-planck-scale  distances  play  a  physical  role.  we  once  again  see,  from  this
complementary perspective, that the ultra-short distances are avoided by string theory. in the physical
framework  of  general  relativity  and  in  the  corresponding  mathematical  framework  of  riemannian
geometry  there  is  a  single  concept  of  distance,  and  it  can  acquire  arbitrarily  small  values.  in  the

physical framework of string theory, and, correspondingly, in the realm of the emerging discipline of
quantum geometry, there are two notions of distance. by judiciously making use of both we find a
concept  of  distance  that  meshes  with  both  our  intuition  and  with  general  relativity  when  distance
scales are large, but that differs from them dramatically when distance scales get small. specifically,
sub-planck-scale distances are inaccessible.

as this discussion is quite subtle, let's re-emphasize one central point. if we were to spurn the
distinction between "easy" and "hard" approaches to measuring length and, say, continue to use the
unwound modes as r shrinks through the planck length, it might seem that we would indeed be able to
encounter a sub-planck-length distance. but the paragraphs above inform us that the word "distance"
in the last sentence must be carefully interpreted, since it can have two different meanings, only one of
which conforms to our traditional notion. and in this case, when r shrinks to sub-planck length but
we continue to use the unwound strings (even though they have now become heavier than the wound
strings),  we  are  employing  the  "hard"  approach  to  measuring  distance,  and  hence  the  meaning  of
"distance" does not conform to our standard usage. however, the discussion is far more than one of
semantics  or  even  of  convenience  or  practicality  of  measurement.  even  if  we  choose  to  use  the
nonstandard notion of distance and thereby describe the radius as being shorter than the planck length,
the physics we encounter—as discussed in previous sections—will be identical to that of a universe
in which the radius, in the conventional sense of distance, is larger than the planck length (as attested
to, for example, by the exact correspondence between tables 10.1 and 10.2). and it is physics, not
language, that really matters.

brandenberger, vafa, and other physicists have made use of these ideas to suggest a rewriting of
the laws of cosmology in which both the big bang and the possible big crunch do not involve a zero-
size universe, but rather one that is planck-length in all dimensions. this is certainly a very appealing
proposal for avoiding the mathematical, physical, and logical conundrums of a universe that emanates
from  or  collapses  to  an  infinitely  dense  point. although  it  is  conceptually  difficult  to  imagine  the
whole of the universe compressed together into a tiny planck-sized nugget, it is truly beyond the pale
to imagine it crushed to a point of no size at all. string cosmology, as we shall discuss in chapter 14,
is a field very much in its infancy but one that holds great promise, and may very well provide us with
this easier-to-swallow alternative to the standard big bang model.

how general is this conclusion?

what  if  the  spatial  dimensions  are  not  circular  in  shape?  do  these  remarkable  conclusions  about
minimum spatial extent in string theory still hold? no one knows for sure. the essential aspect of
circular  dimensions  is  that  they  permit  the  possibility  of  wound  strings.  as  long  as  the  spatial
dimensions—regardless of the details of their shape—allow strings to wind around them, most of the
conclusions  we  have  drawn  should  still  apply.  but  what  if,  say,  two  of  the  dimensions  are  in  the
shape of a sphere? in this case, strings cannot get "trapped" in a wound configuration, because they
can always "slip off" much as a stretched rubber band can pop off a basketball. does string theory
nevertheless limit the size to which these dimensions can shrink?

numerous  investigations  seem  to  show  that  the  answer  depends  on  whether  a  full  spatial
dimension is being shrunk (as in the examples in this chapter) or (as we shall encounter and explain in
chapters  11  and  13)  an  isolated  "chunk"  of  space  is  collapsing.  the  general  belief  among  string
theorists is that, regardless of shape, there is a minimum limiting size, much as in the case of circular

dimensions, so long as we are shrinking a full spatial dimension. establishing this expectation is an
important goal for further research because it has a direct impact on a number of aspects of string
theory, including its implications for cosmology.

mirror symmetry

through general relativity, einstein forged a link between the physics of gravity and the geometry of
spacetime.  at  first  blush,  string  theory  strengthens  and  broadens  the  link  between  physics  and
geometry, since the properties of vibrating strings—their mass and the force charges they carry—are
largely determined by the properties of the curled-up component of space. we have just seen, though,
that  quantum  geometry—the  geometry-physics  association  in  string  theory—has  some  surprising
twists. in general relativity, and in "conventional" geometry, a circle of radius r is different from one
whose radius is 1/r, pure and simple; yet, in string theory they are physically indistinguishable. this
leads us to be bold enough to go further and ask whether there might be geometrical forms of space
that differ in more drastic ways—not just in overall size, but possibly also in shape—but that are
nevertheless physically indistinguishable in string theory.

in 1988, lance dixon of the stanford linear accelerator center made a pivotal observation in
this regard that was further amplified by wolfgang lerche of cern, vafa at harvard, and nicholas
warner, then of the massachusetts institute of technology. based upon aesthetic arguments rooted in
considerations of symmetry, these physicists made the audacious suggestion that it might be possible
for two different calabi-yau shapes, chosen for the extra curled-up dimensions in string theory, to
give rise to identical physics.

to give you an idea of how this rather far-fetched possibility might actually occur, recall that the
number of holes in the extra calabi-yau dimensions determines the number of families into which
string excitations will arrange themselves. these holes are analogous to the holes one finds in a torus
or its multihandled cousins, as illustrated in figure 9.1. one deficiency of the two-dimensional figure
that we must show on the printed page is that it cannot show that a six-dimensional calabi-yau space
can  have  holes  of  a  variety  of  dimensions. although  such  holes  are  harder  to  picture,  they  can  be
described with well-understood mathematics. a key fact is that the number of families of particles
arising from string vibrations is sensitive only to the total number of holes, not to the number of holes
of each particular dimension (that's why, for instance, we did not worry about drawing distinctions
between the different types of holes in our discussion in chapter 9). imagine, then, two calabi-yau
spaces in which the number of holes in various dimensions differs, but in which the total number of
holes is the same. since the number of holes in each dimension is not the same, the two calabi-yaus
have different shapes. but since they have the same total number of holes, each yields a universe with
the same number of families. this, of course, is but one physical property. agreement on all physical
properties is a far more restrictive requirement, but this at least gives the flavor of how the dixon-
lerche-vafa-warner conjecture could possibly be true.

in the fall of 1987, i joined the physics department at harvard as a postdoctoral fellow and my
office was just down the hall from vafa's. as my thesis research had focused on the physical and
mathematical properties of curled-up calabi-yau dimensions in string theory, vafa kept me closely
apprised of his work in this area. when he stopped by my office in the fall of 1988 and told me of the
conjecture that he, lerche, and warner had come upon, i was intrigued but also skeptical. the intrigue
arose from the realization that if their conjecture was true, it might open a new avenue of research on

string  theory;  the  skepticism  arose  from  the  realization  that  guesses  are  one  thing,  established
properties of a theory are quite another.

during  the  following  months,  i  thought  frequently  about  their  conjecture  and,  frankly,  half
convinced myself that it wasn't true. surprisingly, though, a seemingly unrelated research project i had
undertaken in collaboration with ronen plesser, then a graduate student at harvard and now on the
faculty  of  the  weizmann  institute  and  duke  university,  was  soon  to  change  my  mind  completely.
plesser and i had become interested in developing methods for starting with an initial calabi-yau
shape and mathematically manipulating it to produce hitherto unknown calabi-yau shapes. we were
particularly  drawn  to  a  technique  known  as orbifolding,  which  was  pioneered  by  dixon,  jeffrey
harvey of the university of chicago, vafa, and witten in the mid-1980s. roughly speaking, this is a
procedure in which different points on an initial calabi-yau shape are glued together according to
mathematical  rules  that  ensure  that  a  new  calabi-yau  shape  is  produced.  this  is  schematically
illustrated in figure 10.4. the mathematics underlying the manipulations illustrated in figure 10.4 is
formidable,  and  for  this  reason  string  theorists  had  thoroughly  investigated  this  procedure  only  as
applied  to  the  simplest  of  shapes—higher-dimensional  versions  of  the  doughnut  shapes  shown  in
figure 9.1. plesser and i realized, though, that some beautiful new insights of doron gepner, then of
princeton  university,  might  give  a  powerful  theoretical  framework  for  applying  the  orbifolding
technique to full-fledged calabi-yau shapes, such as the one in figure 8.9.

after a few months of intensive pursuit of this idea we came to a surprising realization. if we
glued particular groups of points together in just the right way, the calabi-yau shape we produced
differed from the one we started with in a startling manner: the number of odd-dimensional holes in
the new calabi-yau shape equaled the number of even-dimensional holes in the original, and vice
versa. in particular, this means that the total number of holes—and therefore the number of particle
families—in  each  is  the same  even  though  the  even-odd  interchange  means  that  their  shapes  and
fundamental geometrical structures are quite different.5

figure  10.4  orbifolding  is  a  procedure  in  which  a  new  calabi-yau  shape  is  produced  by  gluing
together various points on an initial calabi-yau shape.

excited by the apparent contact we had made with the dixon-lerche-vafa-warner guess, plesser
and  i  pressed  on  to  the  linchpin  question:  beyond  the  number  of  families  of  particles,  do  the  two

different  calabi-yau  spaces  agree  on  the  rest  of  their  physical  properties?  after  a  couple  more
months of detailed and arduous mathematical analysis during which we received valuable inspiration
and encouragement from graham ross, my thesis advisor at oxford, and also from vafa, plesser and i
were able to argue that the answer was, most definitely, yes. for mathematical reasons having to do
with  the  even-odd  interchange,  plesser  and  i  coined  the  term mirror  manifolds  to  describe  the
physically  equivalent  yet  geometrically  distinct  calabi-yau  spaces. 6  the  individual  spaces  in  a
mirror  pair  of  calabi-yau  spaces  are  not  literally  mirror  images  of  one  another,  in  the  sense  of
everyday usage. but even though they have different geometrical properties, they give rise to one and
the same physical universe when used for the extra dimensions in string theory.

the weeks after finding this result were an extremely anxious time. plesser and i knew that we
were  sitting  on  an  important  new  piece  of  string  physics.  we  had  shown  that  the  tight  association
between geometry and physics originally set down by einstein was substantially modified by string
theory:  drastically  different  geometrical  shapes  that  would  imply  different  physical  properties  in
general relativity were giving rise to identical physics in string theory. but what if we had made a
mistake? what if their physical implications did differ in some subtle way that we had missed? when
we showed our results to yau, for example, he politely but firmly claimed that we must have made an
error; he asserted that from a mathematical standpoint our results were far too outlandish to be true.
his assessment gave us substantial pause. it's one thing to make a mistake in a small or modest claim
that attracts little attention. our result, though, was suggesting an unexpected step in a new direction
that would certainly engender a strong response. if it were wrong, everyone would know.

finally, after much checking and rechecking, our confidence grew and we sent our paper off for
publication. a few days later, i was sitting in my office at harvard and the phone rang. it was philip
candelas from the university of texas, and he immediately asked me if i was seated. i was. he then
told me that he and two of his students, monika lynker and rolf schimmrigk, had found something
that was going to knock me off of my chair. by carefully examining a huge sample set of calabi-yau
spaces  that  they  had  generated  by  computer,  they  found  that  almost  all  came  in  pairs  differing
precisely by the interchange of the number of even and odd holes. i told him that i was still seated—
that plesser and i had found the same result. candelas's and our work turned out to be complementary;
we  had  gone  one  step  further  by  showing  that  all  of  the  resulting  physics  in  a  mirror  pair  was
identical, whereas candelas and his students had shown that a significantly larger sample of calabi-
yau shapes fell into mirror pairs. through the two papers, we had discovered the mirror symmetry
of string theory.7

the physics and the mathematics of mirror symmetry

the loosening of einstein's rigid and unique association between the geometry of space and observed
physics is one of the striking paradigm shifts of string theory. but these developments entail far more
than a change in philosophical stance. mirror symmetry, in particular, provides a powerful tool for
understanding both the physics of string theory and the mathematics of calabi-yau spaces.

mathematicians  working  in  a  field  called  algebraic  geometry  had  been  studying  calabi-yau
spaces for purely mathematical reasons long before string theory was discovered. they had worked
out many of the detailed properties of these geometrical spaces without an inkling of a future physical
application.  certain  aspects  of  calabi-yau  spaces,  however,  had  proven  difficult—essentially
impossible—for  mathematicians  to  unravel  fully.  but  the  discovery  of  mirror  symmetry  in  string

theory  changed  this  significantly.  in  essence,  mirror  symmetry  proclaims  that  particular  pairs  of
calabi-yau spaces, pairs that were previously thought to be completely unrelated, are now intimately
connected by string theory. they are linked by the common physical universe each implies if either is
the  one  selected  for  the  extra  curled-up  dimensions.  this  previously  unsuspected  interconnection
provides an incisive new physical and mathematical tool.

imagine, for instance, that you are busily calculating the physical properties—particle masses
and force charges—associated with one possible calabi-yau choice for the extra dimensions. you
are not particularly concerned with matching your detailed results with experiment, since as we have
seen a number of theoretical and technological obstacles make doing this quite difficult at present.
instead, you are working through a thought experiment concerned with what the world would look like
if a particular calabi-yau space were selected. for a while, everything is going along fine, but then,
in the midst of your work, you come upon a mathematical calculation of insurmountable difficulty. no
one, not even the world's most expert mathematicians, can figure out how to proceed. you are stuck.
but  then  you  realize  that  this  calabi-yau  has  a  mirror  partner.  since  the  resulting  string  physics
associated with each member of a mirror pair is identical, you recognize that you are free to do your
calculations  making  use  of  either.  and  so,  you  rephrase  the  difficult  calculation  on  the  original
calabi-yau space in terms of a calculation on its mirror, assured that the result of the calculation—
the  physics—will  be  the  same.  at  first  sight  you  might  think  that  the  rephrased  version  of  the
calculation  will  be  as  difficult  as  the  original.  but  here  you  come  upon  a  pleasant  and  powerful
surprise: you discover that although the result will be the same, the detailed form of the calculation is
very  different,  and  in  some  cases  the  horribly  difficult  calculation  you  started  with  turns  into  an
extremely easy calculation on the mirror calabi-yau space. there is no simple explanation for why
this happens, but—at least for certain calculations—it most definitely does, and the decrease in level
of difficulty can be dramatic. the implication, of course, is clear: you are no longer stuck.

it's  somewhat  as  if  someone  requires  you  to  count  exactly  the  number  of  oranges  that  are
haphazardly jumbled together in an enormous bin, some 50 feet on each side and 10 feet deep. you
start to count them one by one, but soon realize that the task is just too laborious. luckily, though, a
friend comes along who was present when the oranges were delivered. he tells you that they arrived
neatly packed in smaller boxes (one of which he just happens to be holding) that when stacked were
20 boxes long, by 20 boxes deep, by 20 boxes high. you quickly calculate that they arrived in 8,000
boxes, and that all you need to do is figure out how many oranges are packed in each. this you easily
do  by  borrowing  your  friend's  box  and  filling  it  with  oranges,  allowing  you  to  finish  your  huge
counting task with almost no effort. in essence, by cleverly reorganizing the calculation, you were
able to make it substantially easier to accomplish.

the situation with numerous calculations in string theory is similar. from the perspective of one
calabi-yau space, a calculation might involve an enormous number of difficult mathematical steps.
by  translating  the  calculation  to  its  mirror,  though,  the  calculation  is  reorganized  in  a  far  more
efficient manner, allowing it to be completed with relative ease. this point was made by plesser and
me, and was impressively put into practice in subsequent work by candelas with his collaborators
xenia  de  la  ossa  and  linda  parkes,  from  the  university  of  texas,  and  paul  green,  from  the
university  of  maryland.  they  showed  that  calculations  of  almost  unimaginable  difficulty  could  be
accomplished by using the mirror perspective, with a few pages of algebra and a desktop computer.

this  was  an  especially  exciting  development  for  mathematicians,  because  some  of  these
calculations were precisely the ones they had been stuck on for many years. string theory—or so the
physicists claimed—had beaten them to the solution.

now you should bear in mind that there is a good deal of healthy and generally good-natured
competition  between  mathematicians  and  physicists.  and  as  it  turns  out,  two  norwegian
mathematicians—geir  ellingsrud  and  stein  arild  strømme—happened  to  be  working  on  one  of
numerous calculations that candelas and his collaborators had successfully conquered with mirror
symmetry. roughly speaking, it amounted to calculating the number of spheres that could be "packed"
inside a particular calabi-yau space, somewhat like our analogy of counting oranges in a large bin.
at a meeting of physicists and mathematicians in berkeley in 1991, candelas announced the result
reached by his group using string theory and mirror symmetry: 317,206,375. ellingsrud and strømme
announced  the  result  of  their  very  difficult  mathematical  calculation:  2,682,549,425.  for  days,
mathematicians and physicists debated: who was right? the question turned into a real litmus test of
the quantitative reliability of string theory. a number of people even commented—somewhat in jest—
that  this  test  was  the  next  best  thing  to  being  able  to  compare  string  theory  with  experiment.
moreover, candelas's results went far beyond the single numerical result that ellingsrud and strømme
claimed  to  have  calculated.  he  and  his  collaborators  claimed  to  have  also  answered  many  other
questions that were tremendously more difficult—so difficult in fact, that no mathematician had ever
even attempted to address them. but could the string theory results be trusted? the meeting ended
with a great deal of fruitful exchange between mathematicians and physicists, but no resolution of the
discrepancy.

about  a  month  later,  an  e-mail  message  was  widely  circulated  among  participants  in  the
berkeley meeting with the subject heading physics wins! ellingsrud and strømme had found an error
in their computer code that, when corrected, confirmed candelas's result. since then, there have been
many mathematical checks on the quantitative reliability of the mirror symmetry of string theory: it has
passed all with flying colors. even more recently, almost a decade after physicists discovered mirror
symmetry,  mathematicians  have  made  great  progress  in  revealing  its  inherent  mathematical
foundations.  by  utilizing  substantial  contributions  of  the  mathematicians  maxim  kontsevich,  yuri
manin, gang tian, jun li, and alexander givental, yau and his collaborators bong lian and kefeng
liu have finally found a rigorous mathematical proof of the formulas used to count spheres inside
calabi-yau spaces, thereby solving problems that have puzzled mathematicians for hundreds of years.
beyond the particulars of this success, what these developments really highlight is the role that
physics  has  begun  to  play  in  modern  mathematics.  for  quite  some  time,  physicists  have  "mined"
mathematical archives in search of tools for constructing and analyzing models of the physical world.
now, through the discovery of string theory, physics is beginning to repay the debt and to provide
mathematicians  with  powerful  new  approaches  to  their  unsolved  problems.  string  theory  not  only
provides  a  unifying  framework  for  physics,  but  it  may  well  forge  an  equally  deep  union  with
mathematics as well.

chapter 11

tearing the fabric of space

if  you  relentlessly  stretch  a  rubber  membrane,  sooner  or  later  it  will  tear.  this  simple  fact  has
inspired numerous physicists over the years to ask whether the same might be true of the spatial fabric
making up the universe. that is, can the fabric of space rip apart, or is this merely a misguided notion
that arises from taking the rubber membrane analogy too seriously?

einstein's general relativity says no, the fabric of space cannot tear.1 the equations of general
relativity are firmly rooted in riemannian geometry and, as we noted in the preceding chapter, this is
a framework that analyzes distortions in the distance relations between nearby locations in space. in
order  to  speak  meaningfully  about  these  distance  relations,  the  underlying  mathematical  formalism
requires  that  the  substrate  of  space  is smooth—a  term  with  a  technical  mathematical  meaning,  but
whose  everyday  usage  captures  its  essence:  no  creases,  no  punctures,  no  separate  pieces  "stuck"
together,  and  no  tears.  were  the  fabric  of  space  to  develop  such  irregularities,  the  equations  of
general  relativity  would  break  down,  signaling  some  or  other  variety  of  cosmic  catastrophe—a
disastrous outcome that our apparently well-behaved universe avoids.

this has not kept imaginative theorists over the years from pondering the possibility that a new
formulation of physics that goes beyond einstein's classical theory and incorporates quantum physics
might show that rips, tears, and mergers of the spatial fabric can occur. in fact, the realization that
quantum physics leads to violent short-distance undulations led some to speculate that rips and tears
might  be  a  commonplace  microscopic  feature  of  the  spatial  fabric.  the  concept  of wormholes  (a
notion with which any fan of star trek: deep space nine is familiar) makes use of such musings. the
idea  is  simple:  imagine  you're  the  ceo  of  a  major  corporation  with  headquarters  on  the  ninetieth
floor  of  one  of  new york  city's  world  trade  center  towers.  through  the  vagaries  of  corporate
history, an arm of your company with which you need to have ever increasing contact is ensconced on
the ninetieth floor of the other tower. as it is impractical to move either office, you come up with a
natural  suggestion:  build  a  bridge  from  one  office  to  the  other,  connecting  the  two  towers.  this
allows employees to move freely between the offices without having to go down and then up ninety
floors.

a wormhole plays a similar role: it is a bridge or tunnel that provides a shortcut from one region
of the universe to another. using a two-dimensional model, imagine that a universe is shaped as in
figure 11.1. if your corporate headquarters are located near the lower circle in 11.1(a), you can get
to your field office, located near the upper circle, only by traversing the entire u-shaped path, taking
you from one end of the universe to another. but if the fabric of space can tear, developing punctures
as in 11.1(b), and if these punctures can "grow" tentacles that merge together as in 11.1(c), a spatial
bridge would connect the previously remote regions. this is a wormhole. you should note that the
wormhole has some similarity to the world trade center bridge, but there is one essential difference:
the world trade center bridge would traverse a region of  existing space—the space between the
two  towers.  on  the  contrary,  the  wormhole  creates  a new  region  of  space,  since  the  curved  two-

dimensional space in figure 11.1(a) is all there is (in the setting of our two-dimensional analogy).
regions lying off of the membrane merely reflect the inadequacy of the illustration, which depicts the
u-shaped  universe  as  if  it  were  an  object  within  our  higher-dimensional  universe.  the  wormhole
creates new space and therefore blazes new spatial territory.

figure  11.1  (a)  in  a  "u-shaped"  universe,  the  only  way  to  get  from  one  end  to  the  other  is  by
traversing  the  whole  cosmos.  (b)  the  fabric  of  space  tears,  and  two  ends  of  a  wormhole  start  to
grow. (c) the two wormhole ends merge together, forming a new bridge—a shortcut—from one end
of the universe to the other.

do wormholes exist in the universe? no one knows. and if they do, it is far from clear whether
they would take on only a microscopic form or if they could span vast regions of the universe (as in
deep  space  nine).  but  one  essential  element  in  assessing  whether  they  are  fact  or  fiction  is
determining whether or not the fabric of space can tear.

black holes provide another compelling example in which the fabric of space is stretched to its
limits.  in  figure  3.7,  we  saw  that  the  enormous  gravitational  field  of  a  black  hole  results  in  such
extreme  curvature  that  the  fabric  of  space appears  to  be  pinched  or  punctured  at  the  black  hole's
center.  unlike  in  the  case  of  wormholes,  there  is  strong  experimental  evidence  supporting  the
existence  of  black  holes,  so  the  question  of  what  really  happens  at  their  central  point  is  one  of
science,  not  speculation.  once  again,  the  equations  of  general  relativity  break  down  under  such
extreme conditions. some physicists have suggested that there really is a puncture, but that we are
protected  from  this  cosmic  "singularity"  by  the  event  horizon  of  the  black  hole,  which  prevents
anything from escaping its gravitational grip. this reasoning led roger penrose of oxford university
to speculate on a "cosmic censorship hypothesis" that allows these kinds of spatial irregularities to
occur only if they are deeply hidden from our view behind the shroud of an event horizon. on the
other hand, prior to the discovery of string theory, some physicists surmised that a proper merger of
quantum mechanics and general relativity would show that the apparent puncture of space is actually
smoothed out—"sewn up," so to speak—by quantum considerations.

with  the  discovery  of  string  theory  and  the  harmonious  merger  of  quantum  mechanics  and
gravity,  we  are  finally  poised  to  study  these  issues. as  yet,  string  theorists  have  not  been  able  to
answer  them  fully,  but  during  the  last  few  years  closely  related  issues have  been  solved.  in  this
chapter  we  discuss  how  string  theory,  for  the  first  time,  definitively  shows  that  there  are  physical

circumstances—differing from wormholes and black holes in certain ways—in which the fabric of
space can tear.

a tantalizing possibility

in  1987,  shing-tung  yau  and  his  student  gang  tian,  now  at  the  massachusetts  institute  of
technology,  made  an  interesting  mathematical  observation.  they  found,  using  a  well-known
mathematical  procedure,  that  certain  calabi-yau  shapes  could  be  transformed  into  others  by
puncturing their surface and then sewing up the resulting hole according to a precise mathematical
pattern.2  roughly  speaking,  they  identified  a  particular  kind  of  two-dimensional  sphere—like  the
surface of a beach ball—sitting inside an initial calabi-yau space, as in figure 11.2. (a beach ball,
like all familiar objects, is three-dimensional. here, however, we are referring solely to its surface;
we are ignoring the thickness of the material from which it is made as well as the interior space it
encloses. points on the beach ball's surface can be located by giving two numbers—"latitude" and
"longitude"—much as we locate points on the earth's surface. this is why the surface of the beach
ball, like the surface of the garden hose discussed in preceding chapters, is two-dimensional.) they
then considered shrinking the sphere until it is pinched down to a single point, as we illustrate with
the sequence of shapes in figure 11.3. this figure, and subsequent ones in this chapter, have been
simplified by focusing in on the most relevant "piece" of the calabi-yau shape, but in the back of
your mind you should note that these shape transformations are occuring within a somewhat larger
calabi-yau space, as in figure 11.2. and finally, tian and yau imagined slightly tearing the calabi-
yau space at the pinch (figure 11.4(a)), opening it up and gluing in another beach ball–like shape
(figure 11.4(b)), which they could then reinflate to a nice plump form (figures 11.4(c) and 11.4(d)).

figure 11.2 the highlighted region inside a calabi-yau shape contains a sphere.

figure  11.3 a  sphere  inside  a  calabi-yau  space  shrinks  down  to  a  point,  pinching  the  fabric  of
space. we simplify this and subsequent figures by showing only part of the full calabi-yau shape.

figure 11.4 a pinched calabi-yau space tears open and grows a sphere that smoothes out its surface.
the original sphere of figure 11.3 is "flopped."

mathematicians call this sequence of manipulations a flop-transition. it's as if the original beach
ball shape is "flopped" over into a new orientation within the overall calabi-yau shape. yau, tian,
and others noted that under certain circumstances, the new calabi-yau shape produced by a flop, as
in figure 11.4(d), is topologically distinct from the initial calabi-yau shape in figure 11.3(a). this
is a fancy way of saying that there is absolutely no way to deform the initial calabi-yau space in
figure 11.3(a) into the final calabi-yau space shown in figure 11.4(d) without tearing the fabric of
the calabi-yau space at some intermediate stage.

from  a  mathematical  standpoint,  this  procedure  of  yau  and  tian  is  of  interest  because  it
provides a way to produce new calabi-yau spaces from ones that are known. but its real potential
lies in the realm of physics, where it raises a tantalizing question: could it be that, beyond its being
an  abstract  mathematical  procedure,  the  sequence  displayed  from  figure  11.3(a)  through  figure
11.4(d) might actually occur in nature? might it be that, contrary to einstein's expectations, the fabric
of space can tear apart and subsequently be repaired in the manner described?

the mirror perspective

for a couple of years after their 1987 observation, yau would, every so often, encourage me to think
about the possible physical incarnation of these flop transitions. i didn't. to me it seemed that flop
transitions were merely a piece of abstract mathematics without any bearing on the physics of string
theory. in fact, based on the discussion in chapter 10 in which we found that circular dimensions have
a minimum radius, one might be tempted to say that string theory does not allow the sphere in figure
11.3 to shrink all the way down to a pinched point. but remember, as also noted in chapter 10, that if
a chunk of space collapses—in this case, a spherical piece of a calabi-yau shape—as opposed to the
collapse  of  a  complete  spatial  dimension,  the  argument  identifying  small  and  large  radii  is  not
directly applicable. nevertheless, even though this idea for ruling out flop transitions does not stand
up to scrutiny, the possibility that the fabric of space could tear still seemed rather unlikely.

but  then,  in  1991  the  norwegian  physicist  andy  lütken  together  with  paul  aspinwall,  a
graduate-school  classmate  of  mine  from  oxford  and  now  a  professor  at  duke  university,  asked
themselves  what  proved  to  be  a  very  interesting  question:  if  the  spatial  fabric  of  the  calabi-yau
portion of our universe were to undergo a space-tearing flop transition, what would it look like from
the perspective of the mirror calabi-yau space? to understand the motivation for this question, you
must recall that the physics emerging from either member of a mirror pair of calabi-yau shapes (if
selected for the extra dimensions) is identical, but the complexity of the mathematics that a physicist

must employ to extract the physics can differ significantly between the two. aspinwall and lütken
speculated that the mathematically complicated flop transition of figures 11.3 and 11.4 might have a
far  simpler  mirror  description—one  that  might  give  a  more  transparent  view  on  the  associated
physics.

at the time of their work, mirror symmetry was not understood at the depth required to answer
the question they posed. however, aspinwall and lütken noted that there did not seem to be anything
in the mirror description that would indicate a disastrous physical consequence associated with the
spatial tears of flop transitions. around the same time, the work plesser and i had done in finding
mirror  pairs  of  calabi-yau  shapes  (see  chapter  10)  unexpectedly  led  us  to  think  about  flop
transitions  as  well.  it  is  a  well-known  mathematical  fact  that  gluing  various  points  together  as  in
figure 10.4—the procedure we had used to construct mirror pairs—leads to geometrical situations
that are identical to the pinch and puncture in figures 11.3 and 11.4. physically, though, plesser and i
could find no associated calamity. moreover, inspired by the observations of aspinwall and lütken
(as well as a previous paper of theirs with graham ross), plesser and i realized that we could repair
the  pinch  mathematically  in  two  different  ways.  one  way  led  to  the  calabi-yau  shape  in  figure
11.3(a)  while  the  other  led  to  that  in  figure  11.4(d).  this  suggested  to  us  that  the  evolution  from
figure 11.3(a) through figure 11.4(d) was something that could actually occur in nature.

by late 1991, then, at least a few string theorists had a strong feeling that the fabric of space can

tear. but no one had the technical facility to definitively establish or refute this striking possibility.

inching forward

off and on during 1992, plesser and i tried to show that the fabric of space can undergo space-tearing
flop transitions. our calculations yielded bits and pieces of supporting circumstantial evidence, but
we  could  not  find  definitive  proof.  sometime  during  the  spring,  plesser  visited  the  institute  for
advanced study in princeton to give a talk, and privately told witten about our recent attempts to
realize  the  mathematics  of  space-tearing  flop  transitions  within  the  physics  of  string  theory. after
summarizing our ideas, plesser waited for witten's response. witten turned from the blackboard and
stared out of his office window. after a minute of silence, maybe two, he turned back to plesser and
told him that if our ideas worked out, "it would be spectacular." this rekindled our efforts. but after a
while, with our progress stalled, each of us turned to working on other string theory projects.

even  so,  i  found  myself  mulling  over  the  possibility  of  space-tearing  flop  transitions. as  the
months  went  by,  i  felt  increasingly  sure  that  they  had  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  string  theory.  the
preliminary  calculations  plesser  and  i  had  done,  together  with  insightful  discussions  with  david
morrison, a mathematician from duke university, made it seem that this was the only conclusion that
mirror symmetry naturally supported. in fact, during a visit to duke, morrison and i, together with
some helpful observations from sheldon katz of oklahoma state university, who was also visiting
duke at the time, outlined a strategy for proving that flop transitions can occur in string theory. but
when we sat down to do the required calculations, we found that they were extraordinarily intensive.
even on the world's fastest computer, they would take more than a century to complete. we had made
progress,  but  we  clearly  needed  a  new  idea,  one  that  could  greatly  enhance  the  efficiency  of  our
calculational  method.  unwittingly,  victor  batyrev,  a  mathematician  from  the  university  of  essen,
revealed such an idea through a pair of papers released in the spring and summer of 1992.

batyrev had become very interested in mirror symmetry, especially in the wake of the success of

candelas and his collaborators in using it to solve the sphere-counting problem described at the end
of  chapter  10.  with  a  mathematician's  perspective,  though,  batyrev  was  unsettled  by  the  methods
plesser and i had invoked to find mirror pairs of calabi-yau spaces. although our approach used
tools  familiar  to  string  theorists,  batyrev  later  told  me  that  our  paper  seemed  to  him  to  be  "black
magic." this reflects the large cultural divide between the disciplines of physics and mathematics,
and as string theory blurs their borders, the vast differences in language, methods, and styles of each
field become increasingly apparent. physicists are more like avant-garde composers, willing to bend
traditional rules and brush the edge of acceptability in the search for solutions. mathematicians are
more like classical composers, typically working within a much tighter framework, reluctant to go to
the  next  step  until  all  previous  ones  have  been  established  with  due  rigor.  each  approach  has  its
advantages as well as drawbacks; each provides a unique outlet for creative discovery. like modern
and classical music, it's not that one approach is right and the other wrong—the methods one chooses
to use are largely a matter of taste and training.

batyrev  set  out  to  recast  the  construction  of  mirror  manifolds  in  a  more  conventional
mathematical  framework,  and  he  succeeded.  inspired  by  earlier  work  of  shi-shyr  roan,  a
mathematician  from  taiwan,  he  found  a  systematic  mathematical  procedure  for  producing  pairs  of
calabi-yau spaces that are mirrors of one another. his construction reduces to the procedure plesser
and  i  had  found  in  the  examples  we  had  considered,  but  offers  a  more  general  framework  that  is
phrased in a manner more familiar to mathematicians.

the  flip  side  is  that  batyrev's  papers  invoked  areas  of  mathematics  that  most  physicists  had
never  previously  encountered.  i,  for  example,  could  extract  the  gist  of  his  arguments,  but  had
significant  difficulty  in  understanding  many  crucial  details.  one  thing,  however,  was  clear:  the
methods of his paper, if properly understood and applied, could very well open a new line of attack
on the issue of space-tearing flop transitions.

by  late  summer,  energized  by  these  developments,  i  decided  that  i  wanted  to  return  to  the
problem of flops with full and undistracted intensity. i had learned from morrison that he was going
on leave from duke to spend a year at the institute for advanced study, and i knew that aspinwall
would also be there, as a postdoctoral fellow. after a few phone calls and e-mails, i arranged to take
leave from cornell university and spend the fall of 1992 at the institute as well.

a strategy emerges

one would be hard pressed to think of a more ideal place for long hours of intense concentration than
the institute for advanced study. founded in 1930, it is set within gently rolling fields on the border
of an idyllic forest a few miles from the campus of princeton university. it is said that you can't get
distracted from your work at the institute, because, well, there aren't any distractions.

after leaving germany in 1933, einstein joined the institute and remained there for the duration
of his life. it takes little imagination to picture him pondering unified field theory in the institute's
quiet, lonely, almost ascetic surroundings. the legacy of deep thought infuses the atmosphere, which,
depending on your own immediate state of progress, can be either exciting or oppressive.

shortly after arriving at the institute, aspinwall and i were walking down nassau street (the
main commercial street in the town of princeton) trying to agree on a place to have dinner. this was
no small task since paul is as devout a meat eater as i am a vegetarian. in the midst of catching up on
each other's lives as we were walking along, he asked me if i had any ideas about new things to work

on. i told him i did, and recounted my take on the importance of establishing that the universe, if truly
described by string theory, can undergo space-tearing flop transitions. i also outlined the strategy i
had been pursuing, as well as my newfound hope that batyrev's work might allow us to fill in the
missing pieces. i thought that i was preaching to the converted, and that paul would be excited by this
prospect.  he  wasn't.  in  retrospect,  his  reticence  was  due  largely  to  our  good-natured  and  long-
standing intellectual joust in which we each play devil's advocate to the other's ideas. within days, he
came around and we turned our full attention to flops.

by  then,  morrison  had  also  arrived,  and  the  three  of  us  met  in  the  institute's  tea-room  to
formulate a strategy. we agreed that the central goal was to determine whether the evolution from
figure 11.3(a) to figure 11.4(d) can actually occur in our universe. but a direct attack on the question
was  forbidding,  because  the  equations  describing  this  evolution  are  extremely  difficult,  especially
when the spatial tear occurs. instead, we chose to rephrase the issue using the mirror description,
hoping  that  the  equations  involved  might  be  more  manageable.  this  is  schematically  illustrated  in
figure 11.5, in which the top row is the original evolution from figure 11.3(a) to figure 11.4(d), and
the bottom row is the same evolution from the perspective of the mirror calabi-yau shapes. as a
number  of  us  had  already  realized,  it  turns  out  that  in  the  mirror  rephrasing  it  appears  that  string
physics  is  perfectly  well  behaved  and  encounters  no  catastrophes. as  you  can  see,  there  does  not
seem to be any pinching or tearing in the bottom row in figure 11.5. however, the real question this
observation  raised  for  us  was  this:  were  we  pushing  mirror  symmetry  beyond  the  bounds  of  its
applicability? although the upper and lower calabi-yau shapes drawn on the far left-hand side of
figure 11.5 yield identical physics, is it true that at every step in the evolution to the right-hand side
of figure 11.5—necessarily passing through the pinch-tear-repair stage in the middle—the physical
properties of the original and mirror perspective are identical?

although  we  had  solid  reason  to  believe  that  the  powerful  mirror  relationship  holds  for  the
shape progression leading to the tear in the upper calabi-yau shape in figure 11.5, we realized that
no one knew whether the upper and lower calabi-yau shapes in figure 11.5 continue to be mirrors
after  the  tear  has  occurred.  this  is  a  crucial  question,  because  if  they  are,  then  the  absence  of  a
catastrophe  in  the  mirror  perspective  would  mean  an  absence  in  the  original,  and  we  would  have
demonstrated that space can tear in string theory. we realized that this question could be reduced to a
calculation: extract the physical properties of the universe for the upper calabi-yau shape after the
tear (using, say, the upper-right calabi-yau shape in figure 11.5) and for its supposed mirror (the
lower-right calabi-yau shape in figure 11.5), and see if they are identical.

figure 11.5 a space-tearing flop transition (top row) and its purported mirror rephrasing (bottom
row).

it  was  this  calculation  to  which aspinwall,  morrison,  and  i  devoted  ourselves  in  the  fall  of

1992.

late nights at einstein's final stomping ground

edward  witten's  razor-sharp  intellect  is  clothed  in  a  soft-spoken  demeanor  that  often  has  a  wry,
almost ironic, edge. he is widely regarded as einstein's successor in the role of the world's greatest
living physicist. some would go even further and describe him as the greatest physicist of all time. he
has an insatiable appetite for cutting-edge physics problems and he wields tremendous influence in
setting the direction of research in string theory.

the  breadth  and  depth  of  witten's  productivity  is  legendary.  his  wife,  chiara  nappi,  who  is
also  a  physicist  at  the  institute,  paints  a  picture  of  witten  sitting  at  their  kitchen  table,  mentally
probing  the  edge  of  string  theory  knowledge,  and  only  now  and  then  returning  to  pick  up  pen  and
paper to verify an elusive detail or two.3 another story is told by a postdoctoral fellow who, one
summer,  had  an  office  next  to  witten's.  he  describes  the  unsettling  juxtaposition  of  laboriously
struggling with complex string theory calculations at his desk while hearing the incessant rhythmic
patter of witten's keyboard, as paper after groundbreaking paper poured forth directly from mind to
computer file.

a week or so after i arrived, witten and i were chatting in the institute's courtyard, and he asked
about my research plans. i told him about the space-tearing flops and the strategy we were planning to
pursue.  he  lit  up  upon  hearing  the  ideas,  but  cautioned  that  he  thought  the  calculations  would  be
horrendously difficult. he also pointed out a potential weak link in the strategy i described, having to
do with some work i had done a few years earlier with vafa and warner. the issue he raised turned
out to be only tangential to our approach for understanding flops, but it started him thinking about
what ultimately turned out to be related and complementary issues.

aspinwall,  morrison,  and  i  decided  to  split  our  calculation  in  two  pieces. at  first  a  natural
division might have seemed to involve first extracting the physics associated with the final calabi-
yau shape from the upper row of figure 11.5, and then doing the same for the final calabi-yau shape
from the lower row of figure 11.5. if the mirror relationship is not shattered by the tear in the upper
calabi-yau, then these two final calabi-yau shapes should yield identical physics, just like the two
initial calabi-yau shapes from which they evolved. (this way of phrasing the problem avoids doing
any of the very difficult calculations involving the upper calabi-yau shape just when it tears.) it turns
out, though, that calculating the physics associated with the final calabi-yau shape in the upper row
is pretty straightforward. the real difficulty in carrying out this program lies in first figuring out the
precise shape of the final calabi-yau space in the lower row of figure 11.5—the putative mirror of
the upper calabi-yau—and then in extracting the associated physics.

a  procedure  for  accomplishing  the  second  task—extracting  the  physical  features  of  the  final
calabi-yau space in the lower row, once its shape was precisely known—had been worked out a
few years earlier by candelas. his approach, however, was calculationally intensive and we realized
that it would require a clever computer program to carry it out in our explicit example. aspinwall,
who  in  addition  to  being  a  renowned  physicist  is  a  crackerjack  programmer,  took  on  this  task.
morrison  and  i  set  out  to  accomplish  the  first  task,  namely,  to  identify  the  precise  shape  of  the
candidate mirror calabi-yau space.

it  was  here  that  we  felt  batyrev's  work  could  provide  us  some  important  clues.  once  again,
though, the cultural divide between mathematics and physics—in this case, between morrison and me
—started to impede progress. we needed to join the power of the two fields to find the mathematical
form  of  the  lower  calabi-yau  shapes  that  should  correspond  to  the  same physical  universe  as  the
upper  calabi-yau  shapes,  if  flop  tears  are  within  nature's  repertoire.  but  neither  of  us  was

sufficiently conversant in the other's language to see clear to reaching this end. it became obvious to
both of us that we needed to bite the bullet: each of us needed to take a crash course in the other's
field of expertise. and so, we decided to spend our days pushing forward as best we could on the
calculation,  while  spending  evenings  being  both  professor  and  student  in  a  class  of  one:  i  would
lecture to morrison for an hour or two on the relevant physics; he would then lecture to me for an
hour or two on the relevant mathematics. school would typically let out at about 11 p.m.

we stuck to the program, day in and day out. progress was slow, but we could sense that things
were starting to fall into place. meanwhile, witten was making significant headway on reformulating
the weak link he had earlier identified. his work was establishing a new and more powerful method
of  translation  between  the  physics  of  string  theory  and  the  mathematics  of  the  calabi-yau  spaces.
aspinwall,  morrison,  and  i  had  almost  daily  impromptu  meetings  with  witten  at  which  he  would
show us new insights following from his approach. as the weeks went by, it gradually became clear
that unexpectedly, his work, from a vantage point completely different from our own, was converging
on the issue of flop transitions. aspinwall, morrison, and i realized that if we didn't complete our
calculation soon, witten would beat us to the punch.

of six-packs and working weekends

nothing focuses the mind of a physicist like a healthy dose of competition. aspinwall, morrison, and
i went into high gear. it's important to note that this meant one thing to morrison and me, and quite
another  to aspinwall. aspinwall  is  a  curious  mixture  of  upper-class  british  sensibility,  largely  a
reflection of the decade he spent at oxford as both an undergraduate and a graduate student, infused
ever  so  slightly  with  a  prankster's  roguishness. as  far  as  work  habits  go,  he  is  perhaps  the  most
civilized physicist i know. while many of us work deep into the evening, he never works past 5 p.m.
while many of us work weekends, aspinwall does not. he gets away with this because he is both
sharp and efficient. going into high gear for him merely amounts to notching up his efficiency level to
even greater heights.

by  this  time,  it  was  early  december.  morrison  and  i  had  been  lecturing  to  one  another  for
several months and it was starting to pay off. we were very close to being able to identify the precise
shape of the calabi-yau space we were seeking. moreover, aspinwall had just about finished his
computer code, and he now awaited our result, which would be the required input for his program. it
was a thursday night when morrison and i finally had confidence that we knew how to identify the
sought-after calabi-yau shape. that, too, boiled down to a procedure that required its own, fairly
simple,  computer  code.  by  friday  afternoon  we  had  written  the  program  and  debugged  it;  by  late
friday night we had our result.

but it was after 5 p.m. and it was friday. aspinwall had gone home and would not return until
monday. there was nothing we could do without his computer code. neither morrison nor i could
imagine  waiting  out  the  whole  weekend.  we  were  on  the  verge  of  answering  the  long-pondered
question  of  spatial  tears  in  the  fabric  of  the  cosmos,  and  the  suspense  was  too  much  to  bear.  we
called aspinwall at home. at first he refused to come to work the next morning as we asked. but then,
after much groaning, he consented to join us, as long as we bought him a six-pack of beer. we agreed.

a moment of truth

we  all  met  at  the  institute  saturday  morning  as  planned.  it  was  a  bright  sunny  morning,  and  the
atmosphere was jokingly relaxed. i, for one, half expected that aspinwall would not show up; once he
did,  i  spent  15  minutes  extolling  the  import  of  this  first  weekend  he  had  come  into  the  office.  he
assured me it wouldn't happen again.

we  all  huddled  around  morrison's  computer  in  the  office  he  and  i  shared.  aspinwall  told
morrison how to bring his program up on the screen and showed us the precise form for the required
input. morrison appropriately formatted the results we had generated the previous night, and we were
set to go.

the  particular  calculation  we  were  performing  amounts,  roughly  speaking,  to  determining  the
mass of a certain particle species—a specific vibrational pattern of a string—when moving through a
universe whose calabi-yau component we had spent all fall identifying. we hoped, in line with the
strategy discussed earlier, that this mass would agree identically with a similar calculation done on
the calabi-yau shape emerging from the space-tearing flop transition. the latter was the relatively
easy  calculation,  and  we  had  completed  it  weeks  before;  the  answer  turned  out  to  be  3,  in  the
particular  units  we  were  using.  since  we  were  now  doing  the  purported  mirror  calculation
numerically  on  a  computer,  we  expected  to  get  something  extremely  close  to  but  not  exactly  3,
something like 3.000001 or 2.999999, with the tiny difference arising from rounding errors.

morrison  sat  at  the  computer  with  his  finger  hovering  over  the  enter  button.  with  the  tension
mounting he said, "here goes," and set the calculation in motion. in a couple of seconds the computer
returned its answer: 8.999999. my heart sank. could it be that space-tearing flop transitions shatter
the mirror relation, likely indicating that they cannot actually occur? almost immediately, though, we
all  realized  that  something  funny  must  be  going  on.  if  there  was  a  real  mismatch  in  the  physics
following from the two shapes, it was extremely unlikely that the computer calculation should yield
an answer so close to a whole number. if our ideas were wrong, there was no reason in the world to
expect  anything  but  a  random  collection  of  digits.  we  had  gotten  a  wrong  answer,  but  one  that
suggested, perhaps, that we had just made some simple arithmetic error. aspinwall and i went to the
blackboard, and in a moment we found our mistake: we had dropped a factor of 3 in the "simpler"
calculation we had done weeks before; the true result was 9. the computer answer was therefore just
what we wanted.

of  course,  the  after-the-fact  agreement  was  only  marginally  convincing.  when  you  know  the
answer you want, it is often all too easy to figure out a way of getting it. we needed to do another
example. having already written all of the necessary computer code, this was not hard to do. we
calculated another particle mass on the upper calabi-yau shape, being careful this time to make no
errors. we found the answer: 12. once again, we huddled around the computer and set it on its way.
seconds  later  it  returned  11.999999. agreement.  we  had  shown  that  the  supposed  mirror is  the
mirror, and hence space-tearing flop transitions are part of the physics of string theory.

at this i jumped out of my chair and ran an unrestrained victory lap around the office. morrison
beamed from behind the computer. aspinwall's reaction, though, was rather different. "that's great,
but i knew it would work," he calmly said. "and where's my beer?"

witten's approach

that monday, we triumphantly went to witten and told him of our success. he was very pleased with
our result. and, as it turned out, he too had just found a way of establishing that flop transitions occur

in  string  theory.  his  argument  was  quite  different  from  ours,  and  it  significantly  illuminates  the
microscopic understanding of why the spatial tears do not have any catastrophic consequences.

his approach highlights the difference between a point-particle theory and string theory when
such tears occur. the key distinction is that there are two types of string motion near the tear, but only
one kind of point-particle motion. namely, a string can travel adjacent to the tear, like a point particle
does, but it can also encircle the tear as it moves forward, as illustrated in figure 11.6. in essence,
witten's analysis reveals that strings which encircle the tear, something that cannot happen in a point-
particle theory, shield the surrounding universe from the catastrophic effects that would otherwise be
encountered.  it's  as  if  the  world-sheet  of  the  string—recall  from  chapter  6  that  this  is  a  two-
dimensional surface that a string sweeps out as it moves through space—provides a protective barrier
that precisely cancels out the calamitous aspects of the geometrical degeneration of the spatial fabric.
you might well ask, what if such a tear should occur, and it just so happens that there are no
strings in the vicinity to shield it? moreover, you might also be concerned that at the instant in time
that a tear occurs, a string—an infinitely thin loop—would provide as effective a barrier as shielding
yourself from a cluster bomb by hiding behind a hula hoop. the resolution to both of these issues
relies on a central feature of quantum mechanics that we discussed in chapter 4. there we saw that in
feynman's formulation of quantum mechanics, an object, be it a particle or a string, travels from one
location to another by "sniffing out" all possible trajectories. the resulting motion that is observed is
a combination of all possibilities, with the relative contributions of each possible trajectory precisely
determined by the mathematics of quantum mechanics. should a tear in the fabric of space occur, then
among the possible trajectories of travelling strings are those that encircle the tear—trajectories such
as those in figure 11.6. even if no strings seem to be near the tear when it occurs, quantum mechanics
takes account of physical effects from all possible string trajectories and among these are numerous
(infinite, in fact) protective paths that encircle the tear. it is these contributions that witten showed
precisely to cancel out the cosmic calamity that the tear would otherwise create.

figure  11.6  the  world-sheet  swept  out  by  a  string  provides  a  shield  that  cancels  the  potentially
cataclysmic effects associated with a tear in the fabric of space.

in january 1993, witten and the three of us released our papers simultaneously to the electronic
internet archive through which physics papers are immediately made available worldwide. the two
papers described, from our widely different perspectives, the first examples of topology-changing
transitions—the  technical  name  for  the  space-tearing  processes  we  had  found.  the  long-standing
question about whether the fabric of space can tear had been settled quantitatively by string theory.

consequences

we have made much of the realization that spatial tears can occur without physical calamity. but what
does happen when the spatial fabric rips? what are the observable consequences? we have seen that
many  properties  of  the  world  around  us  depend  upon  the  detailed  structure  of  the  curled-up
dimensions. and so, you would think that the fairly drastic transformation from one calabi-yau to
another as shown in figure 11.5, would have a significant physical impact. in fact, though, the lower-
dimensional  drawings  that  we  use  to  visualize  the  spaces  make  the  transformation  appear  to  be
somewhat more complicated than it actually is. if we could visualize six-dimensional geometry, we
would  see  that,  yes,  the  fabric  is  tearing,  but  it  does  so  in  a  fairly  mild  way.  it's  more  like  the
handiwork of a moth on wool than that of a deep knee bend on shrunken trousers.

our work and that of witten show that physical characteristics such as the number of families of
string vibrations and the types of particles within each family are unaffected by these processes. as
the  calabi-yau  space  evolves  through  a  tear,  what  can  be  affected  are  the  precise  values  of  the
masses  of  the  individual  particles—the  energies  of  the  possible  patterns  of  string  vibrations.  our
papers showed that these masses will vary continuously in response to the changing geometrical form
of the calabi-yau component of space, some going up while others go down. of primary importance,
though, is the fact that there is no catastrophic jump, spike, or any unusual feature of these varying
masses as the tear actually occurs. from the point of view of physics, the moment of tearing has no
distinguishing characteristics.

this point raises two issues. first, we have focused on tears in the spatial fabric that occur in
the  extra  six-dimensional  calabi-yau  component  of  the  universe.  can  such  tears  also  occur  in  the
more  familiar  three  extended  spatial  dimensions?  the  answer,  almost  certainly,  is  yes. after  all,
space is space—regardless of whether it is tightly curled up into a calabi-yau shape or is unfurled
into  the  grand  expanse  of  the  universe  we  perceive  on  a  clear,  starry  night.  in  fact,  we  have  seen
earlier that the familiar spatial dimensions might themselves actually be curled up into the form of a
giant shape that curves back on itself, way on the other side of the universe, and that therefore even
the  distinction  between  which  dimensions  are  curled  up  and  which  are  unfurled  is  somewhat
artificial. although our and witten's analyses did rely on special mathematical features of calabi-yau
shapes, the result—that the fabric of space can tear—is certainly of wider applicability.

second,  could  such  a  topology-changing  tear  happen  today  or  tomorrow?  could  it  have
happened  in  the  past? yes.  experimental  measurements  of  elementary  particle  masses  show  their
values to be quite stable over time. but if we head back to the earliest epochs following the big bang,
even non-string-based theories invoke important periods during which elementary particle masses do
change over time. these periods, from a string-theoretic perspective, could certainly have involved
the topology-changing tears discussed in this chapter. closer to the present, the observed stability of
elementary particle masses implies that if the universe is currently undergoing a topology-changing
spatial tear, it must be doing it exceedingly slowly—so slowly that its effect on elementary particle
masses is smaller than our present experimental sensitivity. remarkably, so long as this condition is
met,  the  universe  could  currently  be  in  the  midst  of  a  spatial  rupture.  if  it  were  occurring  slowly
enough, we would not even know it was happening. this is one of those rare instances in physics in
which the lack of a striking observable phenomenon is cause for great excitement. the absence of an
observable calamitous consequence from such an exotic geometrical evolution is testament to how far
beyond einstein's expectations string theory has gone.

chapter 12

beyond strings: in search of m-theory

in  his  long  search  for  a  unified  theory,  einstein  reflected  on  whether  "god  could  have  made  the
universe in a different way; that is, whether the necessity of logical simplicity leaves any freedom at
all."1 with this remark, einstein articulated the nascent form of a view that is currently shared by
many physicists: if there is a final theory of nature, one of the most convincing arguments in support of
its particular form would be that the theory couldn't be otherwise. the ultimate theory should take the
form that it does because it is the unique explanatory framework capable of describing the universe
without running up against any internal inconsistencies or logical absurdities. such a theory would
declare that things are the way they are because they have to be that way. any and all variations, no
matter how small, lead to a theory that—like the phrase "this sentence is a lie"—sows the seeds of
its own destruction.

establishing such inevitability in the structure of the universe would take us a long way toward
coming  to  grips  with  some  of  the  deepest  questions  of  the  ages.  these  questions  emphasize  the
mystery  surrounding  who  or  what  made  the  seemingly  innumerable  choices  apparently  required  to
design our universe. inevitability answers these questions by erasing the options. inevitability means
that, in actuality, there are no choices. inevitability declares that the universe could not have been
different. as we will discuss in chapter 14, nothing ensures that the universe is so tightly constructed.
nevertheless,  the  pursuit  of  such  rigidity  in  the  laws  of  nature  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  unification
program in modern physics.

by the late 1980s, it appeared to physicists that although string theory came close to providing a
unique picture of the universe, it did not quite make the grade. there were two reasons for this. first,
as briefly noted in chapter 7, physicists found that there were actually five different versions of string
theory.  you  may  recall  that  they  are  called  the  type  i,  type  iia,  type  iib,  heterotic  o(32)
(heterotic-o, for short), and heterotic e8 × e8 (heterotic-e, for short) theories. they all share many
basic features—their vibrational patterns determine the possible mass and force charges, they require
a  total  of  10  spacetime  dimensions,  their  curled-up  dimensions  must  be  in  one  of  the  calabi-yau
shapes,  etc.—and  for  this  reason  we  have  not  emphasized  their  differences  in  previous  chapters.
nevertheless,  analyses  in  the  1980s  showed  that  they  do  differ.  you  can  read  more  about  their
properties  in  the  endnotes,  but  it's  enough  to  know  that  they  differ  in  how  they  incorporate
supersymmetry as well as in significant details of the vibrational patterns they support.2 (type i string
theory, for example, has open strings with two loose ends in addition to the closed loops we have
focused on.) this has been an embarrassment for string theorists because although it's impressive to
have a serious proposal for the final unified theory, having five proposals takes significant wind from
the sails of each.

the  second  deviation  from  inevitability  is  more  subtle.  to  fully  appreciate  it,  you  must
recognize that all physical theories consist of two parts. the first part is the collection of fundamental
ideas  of  the  theory,  which  are  usually  expressed  by  mathematical  equations.  the  second  part  of  a

theory comprises the solutions to its equations. generally speaking, some equations have one and only
one solution while others have more than one solution (possibly many more). (for a simple example,
the equation "2 times a particular number equals 10" has one solution: 5. but the equation "0 times a
particular number equals 0" has infinitely many solutions, since 0 times any number is 0.) and so,
even  if  research  leads  to  a  unique  theory  with  unique  equations,  it  might  be  that  inevitability  is
compromised  because  the  equations  have  many  different  possible  solutions.  by  the  late  1980s,  it
appeared that this was the case with string theory. when physicists studied the equations of any one of
the  five  string  theories,  they  found  that  they do  have  many  solutions—for  example,  many  different
possible ways to curl up the extra dimensions—with each solution corresponding to a universe with
different properties. most of these universes, although emerging as valid solutions to the equations of
string theory, appear to be irrelevant to the world as we know it.

these deviations from inevitability might seem to be unfortunate fundamental characteristics of
string theory. but research since the mid-1990s has given us dramatic new hope that these features
may be merely reflections of the way string theorists have been analyzing the theory. briefly put, the
equations  of  string  theory  are  so  complicated  that  no  one  knows  their  exact  form.  physicists  have
managed to write down only approximate versions of the equations. it is these approximate equations
that  differ  significantly  from  one  string  theory  to  the  next. and  it  is  these  approximate  equations,
within the context of any one of the five string theories, that give rise to an abundance of solutions, a
cornucopia of unwanted universes.

since 1995 (the start of the second superstring revolution), there has been a growing body of
evidence that the exact equations, whose precise form is still beyond our reach, may resolve these
problems, thereby helping to give string theory the stamp of inevitability. in fact, it has already been
established to the satisfaction of most string theorists that, when the exact equations are understood,
they will show that all five string theories are actually intimately related. like the appendages on a
starfish, they are all part of one connected entity whose detailed properties are currently under intense
investigation. rather than having five distinct string theories, physicists are now convinced that there
is one theory that sews all five into a unique theoretical framework. and like the clarity that emerges
when hitherto hidden relationships are revealed, this union is providing a powerful new vantage point
for understanding the universe according to string theory.

to explain these insights we must engage some of the most difficult, cutting-edge developments
in string theory. we must understand the nature of the approximations used in studying string theory
and their inherent limitations. we must gain some familiarity with the clever techniques—collectively
called dualities—that physicists have invoked to circumvent some of these approximations. and then
we must follow the subtle reasoning that makes use of these techniques to find the remarkable insights
alluded to above. but don't worry. the really hard work has already been done by string theorists and
we will content ourselves here with explaining their results.

nevertheless, as there are many seemingly separate pieces that we must develop and assemble,
in this chapter it is especially easy to lose the forest for the trees. and so, if at any time in this chapter
the discussion gets a little too involved and you feel compelled to rush on to black holes (chapter 13)
or cosmology (chapter 14), take a quick glance back at the following section, which summarizes the
key insights of the second superstring revolution.

a summary of the second superstring revolution

the primary insight of the second superstring revolution is summarized by figures 12.1 and 12.2. in
figure 12.1 we see the situation prior to the recent ability to go (partially) beyond the approximation
methods physicists have traditionally used to analyze string theory. we see that the five string theories
were thought of as being completely separate. but, with the newfound insights emerging from recent
research,  as  indicated  in  figure  12.2,  we  see  that,  like  the  starfish's  five  arms,  all  of  the  string
theories are now viewed as a single, all-encompassing framework. (in fact, by the end of this chapter
we will see that even a sixth theory—a sixth arm—will be merged into this union.) this overarching
framework  has  provisionally  been  called  m-theory,  for  reasons  that  will  become  clear  as  we
proceed.  figure  12.2  represents  a  landmark  achievement  in  the  quest  for  the  ultimate  theory.
seemingly  disconnected  threads  of  research  in  string  theory  have  now  been  woven  together  into  a
single  tapestry—a  unique,  all-encompassing  theory  that  may  well  be  the  long-sought  theory  of
everything.

figure 12.1 for many years, physicists working on the five string theories thought they were working
on completely separate theories.

figure 12.2 results from the second superstring revolution have shown that all five string theories
are actually part of a single, unified framework, tentatively called m-theory.

although  much  work  remains  to  be  done,  there  are  two  essential  features  of  m-theory  that
physicists have already uncovered. first, m-theory has eleven dimensions (ten space and one time).
somewhat as kaluza found that one additional spatial dimension allowed for an unexpected merger of
general  relativity  and  electromagnetism,  string  theorists  have  realized  that  one  additional  spatial
dimension in string theory—beyond the nine space and one time dimensions discussed in preceding
chapters—allows for a deeply satisfying synthesis of all five versions of the theory. moreover, this
extra  spatial  dimension  is  not  pulled  out  of  thin  air;  rather,  string  theorists  have  realized  that  the

reasoning of the 1970s and 1980s that led to one time and nine space dimensions was approximate,
and  that  exact  calculations,  which  can  now  be  completed,  show  that  one  spatial  dimension  had
hitherto been overlooked.

the second feature of m-theory that has been discovered is that it contains vibrating strings, but
it  also  includes  other  objects:  vibrating two-dimensional  membranes,  undulating three-dimensional
blobs (called "three-branes"), and a host of other ingredients as well. as with the eleventh dimension,
this feature of m-theory emerges when calculations are freed from reliance on the approximations
used prior to the mid-1990s.

beyond these and a variety of other insights attained over the last few years, much of the true
nature of m-theory remains mysterious—one suggested meaning for the "m." physicists worldwide
are working with great vigor to acquire a full understanding of m-theory, and this may well constitute
the central problem of twenty-first-century physics.

an approximation method

the limitations of the methods physicists have been using to analyze string theory are bound up with
something  called perturbation  theory.  perturbation  theory  is  an  elaborate  name  for  making  an
approximation  to  try  to  give  a  rough  answer  to  a  question,  and  then  systematically  improving  this
approximation by paying closer attention to fine details initially ignored. it plays an important part in
many areas of scientific research, has been an essential element in understanding string theory, and, as
we now illustrate, is also something we encounter frequently in our day-to-day lives.

imagine that one day your car is acting up, so you go see a mechanic to have it checked out. after
giving your car a once-over, he gives you the bad news. the car needs a new engine block, for which
parts and labor typically run in the $900 range. this is a ballpark approximation that you expect to be
refined as the finer details of the work required become apparent. a few days later, having had time
to run additional tests on the car, the mechanic gives you a more precise estimate, $950. he explains
that you also need a new regulator, which with parts and labor costs about $50. finally, when you go
to pick up the car, he has added together all of the detailed contributions and presents you with a bill
of $987.93. this, he explains, includes the $950 for the engine block and regulator, an additional $27
covering a fan belt, $10 for a battery cable, and $.93 for an insulated bolt. the initial approximate
figure of $900 has been refined by including more and more details. in physics terms, these details
are referred to as perturbations to the initial estimate.

when  perturbation  theory  is  properly  and  effectively  applied,  the  initial  estimate  will  be
reasonably close to the final answer; when incorporated, the fine details ignored in the initial estimate
make  small  differences  in  the  final  result.  but  sometimes  when  you  go  to  pay  a  final  bill  it  is
shockingly  different  from  the  initial  estimate. although  you  might  use  other,  more  emotive  terms,
technically this is called a failure of perturbation theory. this means that the initial approximation
was not a good guide to the final answer because the "refinements," rather than causing relatively
small deviations, resulted in large changes to the ballpark estimate.

as indicated briefly in earlier chapters, our discussion of string theory to this point has relied on
a  perturbative  approach  somewhat  analogous  to  that  used  by  the  mechanic.  the  "incomplete
understanding" of string theory that we have referred to from time to time has its roots, in one way or
another, in this approximation method. let's build up to an understanding of this important remark by
discussing perturbation theory in a context that is less abstract than string theory but closer to its string

theory application than the example of the mechanic.

a classical example of perturbation theory

understanding the motion of the earth through the solar system provides a classic example of using a
perturbative approach. on such large distance scales, we need consider only the gravitational force,
but  unless  further  approximations  are  made,  the  equations  encountered  are  extremely  complicated.
remember that according to both newton and einstein, everything exerts a gravitational influence on
everything else, and this quickly leads to a complex and mathematically intractable gravitational tug-
of-war involving the earth, the sun, the moon, the other planets, and, in principle, all other heavenly
bodies as well. as you can imagine, it is impossible to take all of these influences into account and
determine the exact motion of the earth. in fact, even if there were only three heavenly participants,
the equations become so complicated that no one has been able to solve them in full.3

nevertheless,  we can  predict  the  motion  of  the  earth  through  the  solar  system  with  great
accuracy by making use of a perturbative approach. the enormous mass of the sun, in comparison to
that of every other member of our solar system, and its proximity to the earth, in comparison to that of
every other star, makes it by far the dominant influence on the earth's motion. and so, we can get a
ballpark  estimate  by  considering  only  the  sun's  gravitational  influence.  for  many  purposes  this  is
perfectly  adequate.  if  necessary,  we  can  refine  this  approximation  by  sequentially  including  the
gravitational effects of the next-most-relevant bodies, such as the moon and whichever planets are
passing closest by at the moment. the calculations can start to become difficult as the emerging web
of gravitational influences gets complicated, but don't let this obscure the perturbative philosophy:
the  sun-earth  gravitational  interaction  gives  us  an  approximate  explanation  of  the  earth's  motion,
while  the  remaining  complex  of  other  gravitational  influences  offers  a  sequence  of  ever  smaller
refinements.

a perturbative approach works in this example because there is a dominant physical influence
that admits a relatively simple theoretical description. this is not always the case. for example, if we
are interested in the motion of three comparable-mass stars orbiting one another in a trinary system,
there is no single gravitational relationship whose influence dwarfs the others. correspondingly, there
is  no  single  dominant  interaction  that  provides  a  ballpark  estimate,  with  the  other  effects  yielding
small refinements. if we tried to use a perturbative approach by, say, singling out the gravitational
attraction between two stars and using it to determine our ballpark approximation, we would quickly
find that our approach had failed. our calculations would reveal that the "refinement" to the predicted
motion  arising  from  the  inclusion  of  the  third  star  is not  small,  but  in  fact  is  as  significant  as  the
supposed ballpark approximation. this is familiar: the motion of three people dancing the hora bears
little  resemblance  to  two  people  dancing  the  tango.  a  large  refinement  means  that  the  initial
approximation was way off the mark and the whole scheme was built on a house of cards. you should
note that it is not simply a matter of including the large refinement due to the third star. there is a
domino  effect:  the  large  refinement  has  a  significant  impact  on  the  motion  of  the  other  two  stars,
which in turn has a large impact on the motion of the third star, which then has a substantial impact on
the other two, and so on. all strands in the gravitational web are equally important and must be dealt
with simultaneously. oftentimes, in such cases, our only recourse is to make use of the brute power of
computers to simulate the resulting motion.

figure 12.3 strings interact by joining and splitting.

this  example  highlights  the  importance,  when  using  a  perturbative  approach,  of  determining
whether the supposedly ballpark estimate really is in the ballpark, and if it is, which and how many of
the finer details must be included in order to achieve a desired level of accuracy. as we now discuss,
these  issues  are  particularly  crucial  for  applying  perturbative  tools  to  physical  processes  in  the
microworld.

a perturbative approach to string theory

physical processes in string theory are built up from the basic interactions between vibrating strings.
as  we  discussed  toward  the  end  of  chapter  6,*  these  interactions  involve  the  splitting  apart  and
joining  together  of  string  loops,  such  as  in  figure  6.7,  which  we  reproduce  in  figure  12.3  for
convenience. string theorists have shown how a precise mathematical formula can be associated with
the  schematic  portrayal  of  figure  12.3—a  formula  that  expresses  the  influence  that  each  incoming
string has on the resulting motion of the other. (the details of the formula differ among the five string
theories,  but  for  the  time  being  we  will  ignore  such  subtle  features.)  if  it  weren't  for  quantum
mechanics, this formula would be the end of the story of how the strings interact. but the microscopic
frenzy dictated by the uncertainty principle implies that string/antistring pairs (two strings executing
opposite  vibrational  patterns)  can  momentarily  erupt  into  existence,  borrowing  energy  from  the
universe,  so  long  as  they  annihilate  one  another  with  sufficient  haste,  thereby  repaying  the  energy
loan. such pairs of strings, born of the quantum frenzy but which live on borrowed energy and hence
must shortly recombine into a single loop, are known as virtual string pairs. and even though it is
only  momentary,  the  transient  presence  of  these  additional  virtual  string  pairs  affects  the  detailed
properties of the interaction.

figure  12.4  the  quantum  frenzy  can  cause  a  string/antistring  pair  to  erupt  (b)  and  annihilate  (c),
yielding a more complicated interaction.

this is schematically depicted in figure 12.4. the two initial strings slam together at the point
marked (a), where they merge together into a single loop. this loop travels a bit, but at (b) frenzied
quantum  fluctuations  result  in  the  creation  of  a  virtual  string  pair  that  travels  along  and  then
subsequently annihilates at (c), producing, once again, a single string. finally, at (d), this string gives
up its energy by dissociating into a pair of strings that head off in new directions. because of the

single  loop  in  the  center  of  figure  12.4,  physicists  call  this  a  "one-loop"  process.  as  with  the
interaction  depicted  in  figure  12.3,  a  precise  mathematical  formula  can  be  associated  with  this
diagram to summarize the effect the virtual string pair has on the motion of the two original strings.

but that's not the end of the story either, because quantum jitters can cause momentary virtual
string eruptions to occur any number of times, producing a sequence of virtual string pairs. this gives
rise  to  diagrams  with  more  and  more  loops,  as  illustrated  in  figure  12.5.  each  of  these  diagrams
provides a handy and simple way of depicting the physical processes involved: the incoming strings
merge together, quantum jitters cause the resulting loop to split apart into a virtual string pair, these
travel  along  and  then  annihilate  one  another  by  merging  together  into  a  single  loop,  which  travels
along and produces another virtual string pair, and on and on. as with the other diagrams, there is a
corresponding  mathematical  formula  for  each  of  these  processes  that  summarizes  the  effect  on  the
motion of the original pair of strings.4

moreover, just as the mechanic determined your final car-repair bill through a refinement of his
original estimate of $900 by adding to it $50, $27, $10, and $.93, and just as we arrived at an ever
more precise understanding of the motion of the earth through a refinement of the sun's influence by
including the smaller effects of the moon and other planets, string theorists have shown that we can
understand the interaction between two strings by adding together the mathematical expressions for
diagrams with no loops (no virtual string pairs), with one loop (one pair of virtual strings), with two
loops (two pairs of virtual strings), and so forth, as illustrated in figure 12.6.

figure 12.5 the quantum frenzy can cause numerous sequences of string/antistring pairs to erupt and
annihilate.

an exact calculation requires that we add together the mathematical expressions associated with
each of these diagrams, with an increasingly large number of loops. but, since there are an infinite
number  of  such  diagrams  and  the  mathematical  calculations  associated  with  each  get  increasingly
difficult as the number of loops grows, this is an impossible task. instead, string theorists have cast
these calculations into a perturbative framework based on the expectation that a reasonable ballpark
estimate is given by the zero-loop processes, with the loop diagrams resulting in refinements that get
smaller as the number of loops increases.

figure 12.6 the net influence each incoming string has on the other comes from adding together the
influences involving diagrams with ever more loops.

in fact, almost everything we know about string theory—including much of the material covered
in  previous  chapters—has  been  discovered  by  physicists  performing  detailed  and  elaborate
calculations using this perturbative approach. but to trust the accuracy of the results found, one must
determine whether the supposedly ballpark approximations that ignore all but the first few diagrams
in figure 12.6 are really in the ballpark. this leads us to  ask  the  crucial  question: are  we  in  the
ballpark?

is the ballpark in the ballpark?

it  depends.  although  the  mathematical  formula  associated  with  each  diagram  becomes  very
complicated as the number of loops grows, string theorists have recognized one basic and essential
feature.  somewhat  as  the  strength  of  a  rope  determines  the  likelihood  that  vigorous  pulling  and
shaking will cause it to tear into two pieces, there is a number that determines the likelihood that
quantum fluctuations will cause a single string to split into two strings, momentarily yielding a virtual
pair. this number is known as the string coupling constant (more precisely, each of the five string
theories  has  its  own  string  coupling  constant,  as  we  will  discuss  shortly).  the  name  is  quite
descriptive:  the  size  of  the  string  coupling  constant  describes  how  strongly  the  quantum  jitters  of
three strings (the initial loop and the two virtual loops into which it splits) are related—how tightly,
so to speak, they are coupled to one another. the calculational formalism shows that the larger the
string coupling constant, the more likely it is that quantum jitters will cause an initial string to split
apart (and subsequently rejoin); the smaller the string coupling constant, the less likely it is for such
virtual strings to erupt momentarily into existence.

we  will  shortly  take  up  the  question  of  determining  the  value  of  the  string  coupling  constant
within any of the five string theories, but first, what do we really mean by "small" or "large" when
assessing  its  size?  well,  the  mathematics  underlying  string  theory  shows  that  the  dividing  line
between "small" and "large" is the number 1, in the following sense. if the string coupling constant
has a value less than 1, then—like multiple strikes of lightning—larger numbers of virtual string pairs
are increasingly unlikely to erupt momentarily into existence. if the coupling constant is 1 or greater,
however,  it  is  increasingly likely  that  ever-larger  numbers  of  such  virtual  pairs  will  momentarily
burst on the scene.5 the upshot is that if the string coupling constant is less than 1, the loop diagram
contributions become ever smaller as the number of loops grows. this is just what is needed for the
perturbative  framework,  since  it  indicates  that  we  will  get  reasonably  accurate  results  even  if  we
ignore all processes except for those with just a few loops. but if the string coupling constant is not
less than 1, the loop diagram contributions become more important as the number of loops increases.

as  in  the  case  of  a  trinary  star  system,  this  invalidates  a  perturbative  approach.  the  supposed
ballpark approximation—the process with no loops—is not in the ballpark. (this discussion applies
equally well to each of the five string theories—with the value of the string coupling constant in any
given theory determining the efficacy of the perturbative approximation scheme.)

this realization leads us to the next crucial question: what is the value of the string coupling
constant (or, more precisely, what are the values of the string coupling constants in each of the five
string  theories)? at  present,  no  one  has  been  able  to  answer  this  question.  it  is  one  of  the  most
important unresolved issues in string theory. we can be sure that conclusions based on a perturbative
framework are justified only if the string coupling constant is less than 1. moreover, the precise value
of the string coupling constant has a direct impact on the masses and charges carried by the various
string vibrational patterns. thus, we see that much physics hinges on the value of the string coupling
constant. and so, let's take a closer look at why the important question of its value—in any of the five
string theories—remains unanswered.

the equations of string theory

the perturbative approach for determining how strings interact with one another can also be used to
determine  the  fundamental  equations  of  string  theory.  in  essence,  the  equations  of  string  theory
determine  how  strings  interact  and,  conversely,  the  way  strings  interact  directly  determines  the
equations of the theory.

as  a  prime  example,  in  each  of  the  five  string  theories  there  is  an  equation  that  is  meant  to
determine the value of the theory's coupling constant. currently, however, physicists have been able
to find only an approximation to this equation, in each of the five string theories, by mathematically
evaluating a small number of relevant string diagrams using a perturbative approach. here is what the
approximate equations say: in any of the five string theories, the string coupling constant takes on a
value such that if it is multiplied by zero the result is zero. this is a terribly disappointing equation;
since  any  number  times  zero  yields  zero,  the  equation  can  be  solved  with  any  value  of  the  string
coupling  constant.  thus,  in  any  of  the  five  string  theories,  the  approximate  equation  for  its  string
coupling constant gives us no information about its value.

while we are at it, in each of the five string theories there is another equation that is supposed to
determine  the  precise  form  of  both  the  extended  and  the  curled-up  spacetime  dimensions.  the
approximate  version  of  this  equation  that  we  currently  have  is  far  more  restrictive  than  the  one
dealing  with  the  string  coupling  constant,  but  it  still  admits  many  solutions.  for  instance,  four
extended  spacetime  dimensions  together  with  any  curled-up,  six-dimensional  calabi-yau  space
provide a whole class of solutions, but even this does not exhaust the possibilities, which also allow
for a different split between the number of extended and curled-up dimensions.6

what can we make of these results? there are three possibilities. first, starting with the most
pessimistic possibility, although each string theory comes equipped with equations to determine the
value  of  its  coupling  constant  as  well  as  the  dimensionality  and  precise  geometrical  form  of
spacetime—something  no  other  theory  can  claim—even  the  as-yet-unknown  exact  form  of  these
equations may admit a vast spectrum of solutions, substantially weakening their predictive power. if
true, this would be a setback, since the promise of string theory is that it will be able to explain these
features of the cosmos, rather than require us to determine them from experimental observation and,
more or less arbitrarily, insert them into the theory. we will return to this possibility in chapter 15.

second, the unwanted flexibility in the approximate string equations may be an indication of a subtle
flaw in our reasoning. we are attempting to use a perturbative approach to determine the value of the
string  coupling  constant  itself.  but,  as  discussed,  perturbative  methods  are  sensible  only  if  the
coupling constant is less than 1, and hence our calculation may be making an unjustified assumption
about its own answer—namely, that the result will be smaller than 1. our failure could well indicate
that this assumption is wrong and that, perhaps, the coupling in any one of the five string theories is
greater than 1. third, the unwanted flexibility may merely be due to our use of approximate rather
than exact equations. for instance, even though the coupling constant in a given string theory might be
less  than  1,  the  equations  of  the  theory  may  still  depend  sensitively  on  the  contributions  from all
diagrams. that is, the accumulated small refinements from diagrams with ever more loops might be
essential  for  modifying  the  approximate  equations—which  admit  many  solutions—into  exact
equations that are far more restrictive.

by  the  early  1990s,  the  latter  two  possibilities  made  it  clear  to  most  string  theorists  that
complete reliance on the perturbative framework was standing squarely in the way of progress. the
next breakthrough, most everyone in the field agreed, would require a nonperturbative approach—an
approach  that  was  not  shackled  to  approximate  calculational  techniques  and  could  therefore  reach
well beyond the limitations of the perturbative framework. as of 1994, finding such a means seemed
like a pipe dream. sometimes, though, pipe dreams spill over into reality.

duality

hundreds of string theorists from around the world gather together annually for a conference devoted
to  recapping  the  past  year's  results  and  assessing  the  relative  merit  of  various  possible  research
directions. depending on the state of progress in a given year, one can usually predict the level of
interest and excitement among the participants. in the mid-1980s, the heyday of the first superstring
revolution, the meetings were filled with unrestrained euphoria. physicists had widespread hope that
they  would  shortly  understand  string  theory  completely,  and  that  they  would  reveal  it  to  be  the
ultimate theory of the universe. in retrospect this was naive. the intervening years have shown that
there  are  many  deep  and  subtle  aspects  of  string  theory  that  will  undoubtedly  take  prolonged  and
dedicated  effort  to  understand.  the  early,  unrealistic  expectations  resulted  in  a  backlash;  when
everything  did  not  immediately  fall  into  place,  many  researchers  were  crestfallen.  the  string
conferences  of  the  late  1980s  reflected  the  low-level  disillusionment—physicists  presented
interesting  results,  but  the  atmosphere  lacked  inspiration.  some  even  suggested  that  the  community
stop holding an annual strings conference. but things picked up in the early 1990s. through various
breakthroughs, some of which we have discussed in previous chapters, string theory was rebuilding
its momentum and researchers were regaining their excitement and optimism. but very little presaged
what happened at the strings conference in march 1995 at the university of southern california.

when  his  appointed  hour  to  speak  had  arrived,  edward  witten  strode  to  the  podium  and
delivered a lecture that ignited the second superstring revolution. inspired by earlier works of duff,
hull, townsend, and building on insights of schwarz, the indian physicist ashoke sen, and others,
witten announced a strategy for transcending the perturbative understanding of string theory. a central
part of the plan involves the concept of duality.

physicists  use  the  term  duality  to  describe  theoretical  models  that  appear  to  be  different  but
nevertheless  can  be  shown  to  describe  exactly  the  same  physics.  there  are  "trivial"  examples  of

dualities in which ostensibly different theories are actually identical and appear to be different only
because  of  the  way  in  which  they  happen  to  be  presented.  to  someone  who  knows  only  english,
general relativity might not immediately be recognized as einstein's theory if presented in chinese. a
physicist  fluent  in  both  languages,  though,  can  easily  perform  a  translation  from  one  to  the  other,
establishing  their  equivalence.  we  call  this  example  "trivial"  because  nothing  is  gained,  from  the
point of view of physics, by such a translation. if someone who is fluent in english and chinese were
studying a difficult problem in general relativity, it would be equally challenging regardless of the
language  used  to  expressed  it.  a  switch  from  english  to  chinese,  or  vice  versa,  brings  no  new
physical insight.

nontrivial  examples  of  duality  are  those  in  which  distinct  descriptions  of  the  same  physical
situation do  yield  different  and  complementary  physical  insights  and  mathematical  methods  of
analysis. in fact, we have already encountered two examples of duality. in chapter 10, we discussed
how  string  theory  in  a  universe  that  has  a  circular  dimension  of  radius r  can  equally  well  be
described  as  a  universe  with  a  circular  dimension  of  radius  1/r.  these  are  distinct  geometrical
situations  that,  through  the  properties  of  string  theory,  are  actually  physically  identical.  mirror
symmetry  is  a  second  example.  here  two  different  calabi-yau  shapes  of  the  extra  six  spatial
dimensions—universes that at first sight would appear to be completely distinct—yield exactly the
same physical properties. they give dual descriptions of a single universe. of crucial importance,
unlike the case of english versus chinese, there are important physical insights that follow from using
these  dual  descriptions,  such  as  a  minimum  size  for  circular  dimensions  and  topology-changing
processes in string theory.

in his lecture at strings '95, witten gave evidence for a new, profound kind of duality. as briefly
outlined at the beginning of this chapter, he suggested that the five string theories, although apparently
different  in  their  basic  construction,  are  all  just  different  ways  of  describing  the  same  underlying
physics. rather than having five different string theories, then, we would simply have five different
windows onto this single underlying theoretical framework.

before the developments of the mid-1990s, the possibility of such a grand version of duality was
one of those wishful ideas that physicists might harbor, but about which they would rarely if ever
speak, since it seems so outlandish. if two string theories differ with regard to significant details of
their construction, it's hard to imagine how they could merely be different descriptions of the same
underlying physics. nonetheless, through the subtle power of string theory, there is mounting evidence
that all five string theories are dual. and furthermore, as we will discuss, witten gave evidence that
even a sixth theory gets mixed into the stew.

these  developments  are  intimately  entwined  with  the  issues  regarding  the  applicability  of
perturbative methods we encountered at the end of the preceding section. the reason is that the five
string theories are manifestly different when each is weakly coupled—a term of the trade meaning that
the coupling constant of a theory is less than 1. because of their reliance on perturbative methods,
physicists have been unable for some time to address the question of what properties any one of the
string theories would have if its coupling constant should be larger than 1—the so-called strongly
coupled behavior. the claim of witten and others, as we now discuss, is that this crucial question can
now be answered. their results convincingly suggest that, together with a sixth theory we have yet to
describe, the strong coupling behavior of any of these theories has a dual description in terms of the
weak coupling behavior of another, and vice versa.

to gain a more tangible sense of what this means, you might want to keep the following analogy
in mind. imagine two rather sheltered individuals. one loves ice but, strangely enough, has never seen

water (in its liquid form). the other loves water but, equally strangely, has never seen ice. through a
chance meeting, they decide to team up for a camping trip in the desert. when they set out to leave,
each is fascinated by the other's gear. the ice-lover is captivated by the water-lover's silky smooth
transparent  liquid,  and  the  water-lover  is  strangely  drawn  to  the  remarkable  solid  crystal  cubes
brought by the ice-lover. neither has any inkling that there is actually a deep relationship between
water and ice; to them, they are two completely different substances. but as they head out into the
scorching heat of the desert, they are shocked to find that the ice slowly begins to turn into water.
and, in the frigid cold of the desert night, they are equally shocked to find that the liquid water slowly
begins to turn into solid ice. they realize that these two substances—which they initially thought to be
completely unrelated—are intimately connected.

the  duality  among  the  five  string  theories  is  somewhat  similar:  roughly  speaking,  the  string
coupling constants play a role analogous to temperature in our desert analogy. like ice and water, any
two of the five string theories, at first sight, appear to be completely distinct. but as we vary their
respective coupling constants, the theories transmute among themselves. just as ice transmutes into
water as we raise its temperature, one string theory can transmute into another as we increase the
value of its coupling constant. this takes us a long way toward showing that all of the string theories
are dual descriptions of one single underlying structure—the analog of h2o for water and ice.

the reasoning underlying these results relies almost entirely on the use of arguments rooted in

principles of symmetry. let's discuss this.

the power of symmetry

over the years, no one even attempted to study the properties of any of the five string theories for
large values of their string coupling constants because no one had any idea how to proceed without
the perturbative framework. however, during the late 1980s and early 1990s, physicists made slow
but  steady  progress  in  identifying  certain  special  properties—including  certain  masses  and  force
charges—that are part of the strong-coupling physics of a given string theory, and yet are still within
our  ability  to  calculate.  the  calculation  of  these  properties,  which  necessarily  transcends  the
perturbative framework, has played a central role in driving the progress of the second superstring
revolution and is firmly rooted in the power of symmetry.

symmetry  principles  provide  insightful  tools  for  understanding  a  great  many  things  about  the
physical  world.  we  have  discussed,  for  instance,  that  the  well-supported  belief  that  the  laws  of
physics do not treat any place in the universe or moment in time as special allows us to argue that the
laws governing the here and now are the same ones at work everywhere and everywhen. this is a
grandiose  example,  but  symmetry  principles  can  be  equally  important  in  less  all-encompassing
circumstances. for instance, if you witness a crime but were able to catch only a glimpse of the right
side of the perpetrator's face, a police artist can nonetheless use your information to sketch the whole
face. symmetry is why. although there are differences between the left and right sides of a person's
face,  most  are  symmetric  enough  that  an  image  of  one  side  can  be  flipped  over  to  get  a  good
approximation of the other.

in each of these widely different applications, the power of symmetry is its ability to nail down
properties in an indirect manner—something that is often far easier than a more direct approach. we
could  learn  about  fundamental  physics  in  the  andromeda  galaxy  by  going  there,  finding  a  planet
around some star, building accelerators, and performing the kinds of experiments carried out on earth.

but the indirect approach of invoking symmetry under changes of locale is far easier. we could also
learn about features on the left side of the perpetrator's face by tracking him down and examining it.
but it is often far easier to invoke the left-right symmetry of faces.7

supersymmetry  is  a  more  abstract  symmetry  principle  that  relates  physical  properties  of
elementary  constituents  that  carry  different  amounts  of  spin.  at  best  there  are  only  hints  from
experimental  results  that  the  microworld  incorporates  this  symmetry,  but,  for  reasons  discussed
earlier, there is a strong belief that it does. it is certainly an integral part of string theory. in the 1990s,
led by the pioneering work of nathan seiberg of the institute for advanced study, physicists have
realized that supersymmetry provides a sharp and incisive tool that can answer some very difficult
and important questions by indirect means.

even without understanding intricate details of a theory, the fact that it has supersymmetry built
in allows us to place significant constraints on the properties it can have. using a linguistic analogy,
imagine  that  we  are  told  that  a  sequence  of  letters  has  been  written  on  a  slip  of  paper,  that  the
sequence  has  exactly  three  occurrences,  say,  of  the  letter  "y,"  and  that  the  paper  has  been  hidden
within a sealed envelope. if we are given no further information, then there is no way that we can
guess the sequence—for all we know it might be a random assortment of letters with three y's like
mvcfojziyxidqfqzyycdi or any one of the infinitely many other possibilities. but imagine that we are
subsequently given two further clues: the hidden sequence of letters spells out an english word and it
has the minimum number of letters consistent with the first clue of having three y's. from the infinite
number  of  letter  sequences  at  the  outset,  these  clues  reduce  the  possibilities  to one  word—to  the
shortest english word containing three y's: syzygy.

supersymmetry  supplies  similar  constraining  clues  for  those  theories  that  incorporate  its
symmetry  principles.  to  get  a  feel  for  this,  imagine  that  we  are  presented  with  a  physics  puzzle
analogous to the linguistic puzzle just described. hidden inside a box there is something—its identity
is left unspecified—that has a certain force charge. the charge might be electric, magnetic, or any of
the  other  generalizations,  but  to  be  concrete  let's  say  it  has  three  units  of  electric  charge.  without
further information, the identity of the contents cannot be determined. it might be three particles of
charge 1, like positrons or protons; it might be four particles of charge 1 and one particle of charge -1
(like the electron), as this combination still has a net charge of three; it might be nine particles of
charge  one-third  (like  the  up-quark)  or  it  might  be  the  same  nine  particles  accompanied  by  any
number of chargeless particles (such as photons). as was the case with the hidden sequence of letters
when we only had the clue about the three y's, the possibilities for the contents of the box are endless.
but let's now imagine that, as in the case of the linguistic puzzle, we are given two further clues:
the  theory  describing  the  world—and  hence  the  contents  of  the  box—is  supersymmetric,  and  the
contents of the box has the minimum mass consistent with the first clue of having three units of charge.
based on the insights of e. bogomol'nyi, manoj prasad, and charles sommerfield, physicists have
shown that this specification of a tight organizational framework (the framework of supersymmetry,
the analog of the english language) and a "minimality constraint" (minimum mass for a chosen amount
of electric charge, the analog of a minimum word length for a chosen number of y's) implies that the
identity of the hidden contents is nailed down uniquely. that is, merely by ensuring that the contents
of the box is the lightest it could possibly be and still have the specified charge, physicists showed
that its identity is fully established. constituents of minimum mass for a chosen value of charge are
known as bps states, in honor of their three discoverers.8

the important thing about bps states is that their properties are uniquely, easily, and exactly
determined  without  resort  to  a  perturbative  calculation.  this  is  true  regardless  of  the  value  of  the

coupling constants. that is, even if the string coupling constant is large, implying that the perturbative
approach is invalid, we are still able to deduce the exact properties of the bps configurations. the
properties  are  often  called nonperturbative  masses  and  charges  since  their  values  transcend  the
perturbative  approximation  scheme.  for  this  reason,  you  can  also  think  of  bps  as  standing  for
"beyond perturbative states."

the bps properties exhaust only a small part of the full physics of a chosen string theory when
its  coupling  constant  is  large,  but  they  nonetheless  give  us  a  tangible  grip  on  some  of  its  strong
coupling characteristics. as the coupling constant in a chosen string theory is increased beyond the
realm accessible to perturbation theory, we anchor our limited understanding in the bps states. like a
few choice words in a foreign tongue, we will find that they will take us quite far.

duality in string theory

following witten, let's start with one of the five string theories, say the type i string, and imagine that
all of its nine space dimensions are flat and unfurled. this, of course, is not at all realistic, but it
makes the discussion simpler; we will return to curled-up dimensions shortly. we begin by assuming
that the string coupling constant is much less than 1. in this case, perturbative tools are valid, and
hence many of the detailed properties of the theory can and have been worked out with accuracy. if
we increase the value of the coupling constant but still keep it a good deal less than 1, perturbative
methods can still be used. the detailed properties of the theory will change somewhat—for instance,
the numerical values associated with the scattering of one string off another will be a bit different
because  the  multiple  loop  processes  of  figure  12.6  make  greater  contributions  when  the  coupling
constant increases. but beyond these changes in detailed numerical properties, the overall physical
content  of  the  theory  remains  the  same,  so  long  as  the  coupling  constant  stays  in  the  perturbative
realm.

as  we  increase  the  type  i  string  coupling  constant  beyond  the  value  1,  perturbative  methods
become invalid and so we focus only on the limited set of nonperturbative masses and charges—the
bps  states—that  are  still  within  our  ability  to  understand.  here  is  what  witten  argued,  and  later
confirmed through joint work with joe polchinski of the university of california at santa barbara:
these strong coupling characteristics of type i string theory exactly agree with known properties
of heterotic-o string theory, when the latter has a small value for its string coupling constant.
that is, when the coupling constant of the type i string is large, the particular masses and charges that
we  know  how  to  extract  are  precisely  equal  to  those  of  the  heterotic-o  string  when  its  coupling
constant is small. this gives us a strong indication that these two string theories, which at first sight,
like water and ice, seem totally different, are actually dual. it persuasively suggests that the physics of
the type i theory for large values of its coupling constant is identical to the physics of the heterotic-
o  theory  for  small  values  of  its  coupling  constant.  related  arguments  gave  equally  persuasive
evidence that the reverse is also true: the physics of the type i theory for small values of its coupling
constant  is  identical  to  that  of  the  heterotic-o  theory  for  large  values  of  its  coupling  constant.9
although  the  two  string  theories  appear  to  be  unrelated  when  analyzed  using  the  perturbative
approximation  scheme,  we  now  see  that  each  transforms  into  the  other—somewhat  like  the
transmutation between water and ice—as their coupling constants are varied in value.

this central new kind of result, in which the strong coupling physics of one theory is described
by the weak coupling physics of another theory, is known as strong-weak duality. as with the other

dualities  discussed  previously,  it  tells  us  that  the  two  theories  involved  are  not  actually  distinct.
rather,  they  give  two  dissimilar  descriptions  of  the  same  underlying  theory.  unlike  the  english-
chinese trivial duality, strong-weak coupling duality is powerful. when the coupling constant of one
member  of  a  dual  pair  of  theories  is  small,  we  can  analyze  its  physical  properties  using  well-
developed perturbative tools. if the coupling constant of the theory is large, however, and thus the
perturbative methods break down, we now know that we can use the dual description—a description
in  which  the  relevant  coupling  constant  is  small—and  return  to  the  use  of  perturbative  tools.  the
translation has resulted in our having quantitative methods to analyze a theory we initially thought to
be beyond our theoretical abilities.

actually proving that the strong coupling physics of the type i string theory is identical to the
weak coupling physics of the heterotic-o theory, and vice versa, is an extremely difficult task that
has  not  yet  been  achieved.  the  reason  is  simple.  one  member  of  the  pair  of  the  supposedly  dual
theories is not amenable to perturbative analysis, as its coupling constant is too big. this prevents
direct calculations of many of its physical properties. in fact, it is precisely this point that makes the
proposed duality so potent, for, if true, it provides a new tool for analyzing a strongly coupled theory:
use perturbative methods on its weakly coupled dual description.

but even if we cannot prove that the two theories are dual, the perfect alignment between those
properties  we can  extract  with  confidence  provides  extremely  compelling  evidence  that  the
conjectured strong-weak coupling relationship between the type i and heterotic-o string theories is
correct. in fact, increasingly clever calculations that have been performed to test the proposed duality
have all resulted in positive results. most string theorists are convinced that the duality is true.

following  the  same  approach,  one  can  study  the  strong  coupling  properties  of  another  of  the
remaining string theories, say, the type iib string. as originally conjectured by hull and townsend
and supported by the research of a number of physicists, something equally remarkable appears to
occur. as the coupling constant of the type iib string gets larger and larger, the physical properties
that we are still able to understand appear to match up exactly with that of the weakly coupled type
iib  string  itself.  in  other  words,  the  type  iib  string  is self-dual.10  specifically,  detailed  analysis
persuasively suggests that if the type iib coupling constant were larger than 1, and if we were to
change  its  value  to  its  reciprocal  (whose  value,  therefore,  is  less  than  1),  the  resulting  theory  is
absolutely  identical  to  the  one  we  started  with.  similar  to  what  we  found  in  trying  to  squeeze  a
circular dimension to a sub-planck-scale length, if we try to increase the type iib coupling to a value
larger than 1, the self-duality shows that the resulting theory is precisely equivalent to the type iib
string with a coupling smaller than 1.

a summary, so far

let's  see  where  we  are.  by  the  mid-1980s,  physicists  had  constructed  five  different  superstring
theories. in the approximation scheme of perturbation theory, they all appear to be distinct. but this
approximation method is valid only if the string coupling constant in a given string theory is less than
1. the expectation has been that physicists should be able to calculate the precise value of the string
coupling  constant  in  any  given  string  theory,  but  the  form  of  the  approximate  equations  currently
available  makes  this  impossible.  for  this  reason,  physicists  aim  to  study  each  of  the  five  string
theories  for  a  range  of  possible  values  of  their  respective  coupling  constants,  both  less  than  and
greater  than  1—i.e.,  both  weak  and  strong  coupling.  but  traditional  perturbative  methods  give  no

insight into the strong coupling characteristics of any of the string theories.

recently,  by  making  use  of  the  power  of  supersymmetry,  physicists  have  learned  how  to
calculate some of the strong coupling properties of a given string theory. and to the surprise of most
everyone in the field, the strong coupling properties of the heterotic-o string appear to be identical to
the  weak  coupling  properties  of  the  type  i  string,  and  vice  versa.  moreover,  the  strong  coupling
physics of the type iib string is identical to its own properties when its coupling is weak. these
unexpected links encourage us to follow witten and press on to the other two string theories, type iia
and  heterotic-e,  to  see  how  they  fit  into  the  overall  picture.  here  we  will  find  even  more  exotic
surprises. to prepare ourselves, we need a brief historical digression.

supergravity

in  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s,  before  the  surge  of  interest  in  string  theory,  many  theoretical
physicists  sought  a  unified  theory  of  quantum  mechanics,  gravity,  and  the  other  forces  in  the
framework  of  point-particle  quantum  field  theory.  the  hope  was  that  the  inconsistencies  between
point-particle  theories  involving  gravity  and  quantum  mechanics  would  be  overcome  by  studying
theories with a great deal of symmetry. in 1976 stanley deser and bruno zumino working at cern,
and independantly, daniel freedman, sergio ferrara, and peter van nieuwenhuizen, all then of the
state  university  of  new  york  at  stony  brook,  discovered  that  the  most  promising  were  those
involving  supersymmetry,  since  the  tendency  of  bosons  and  fermions  to  give  cancelling  quantum
fluctuations helps to calm the violent microscopic frenzy. the authors coined the term supergravity to
describe  supersymmetric  quantum  field  theories  that  try  to  incorporate  general  relativity.  such
attempts  to  merge  general  relativity  with  quantum  mechanics  ultimately  met  with  failure.
nevertheless,  as  mentioned  in  chapter  8,  there  was  a  prescient  lesson  to  be  learned  from  these
investigations, one that presaged the development of string theory.

the lesson, which perhaps became most clear through the work of eugene cremmer, bernard
julia,  and  scherk,  all  of  the  ecole  normale  superieure  in  1978,  was  that  the  attempts  that  came
closest  to  success  were  supergravity  theories  formulated  not  in  four  dimensions,  but  in  more.
specifically, the most promising were the versions calling for ten or eleven dimensions, with eleven
dimensions, it turns out, being the maximal possible.11 contact with four observed dimensions was
accomplished in the framework, once again, of kaluza and klein: the extra dimensions were curled
up. in the ten-dimensional theories, as in string theory, six dimensions were curled up, while seven
were curled up for the eleven-dimensional theory.

when  string  theory  took  physicists  by  storm  in  1984,  the  perspective  on  point-particle
supergravity theories changed dramatically. as emphasized repeatedly, if we examine a string with
the precision available currently and for the foreseeable future, it looks like a point particle. we can
make  this  informal  remark  precise:  when  studying  low-energy  processes  in  string  theory—those
processes that do not have enough energy to probe the ultramicroscopic, extended nature of the string
—we can approximate a string by a structureless point particle, using the framework of point-particle
quantum field theory. we cannot use this approximation when dealing with short-distance or high-
energy processes because we know that the extended nature of the string is crucial to its ability to
resolve the conflicts between general relativity and quantum mechanics that a point-particle theory
cannot. but at low enough energies—large enough distances—these problems are not encountered,
and such an approximation is often made for the sake of calculational convenience.

the  quantum  field  theory  that  most  closely  approximates  string  theory  in  this  manner  is  none
other  than  ten-dimensional  supergravity.  the  special  properties  of  ten-dimensional  supergravity
discovered  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  are  now  understood  to  be  low-energy  relics  of  the  underlying
power of string theory. researchers studying ten-dimensional supergravity had uncovered the tip of a
very  deep  iceberg—the  rich  structure  of  superstring  theory.  in  fact,  it  turns  out  that  there  are  four
different  ten-dimensional  supergravity  theories  that  differ  in  details  regarding  the  precise  way  in
which  supersymmetry  is  incorporated.  three  of  these  turn  out  to  be  the  low-energy  point-particle
approximations to the type iia string, the type iib string, and the heterotic-e string. the fourth gives
the the low-energy point-particle approximation to both the type i string and the heterotic-o string;
in retrospect, this was the first indication of the close connection between these two string theories.

this is a very tidy story except that eleven-dimensional supergravity seems to have been left out
in  the  cold.  string  theory,  formulated  in  ten  dimensions,  appears  to  have  no  room  for  an  eleven-
dimensional theory. for a number of years, the general view held by most but not all string theorists
was that eleven-dimensional supergravity was a mathematical oddity without any connection to the
physics of string theory.12

glimmers of m-theory

the view now is very different. at strings '95, witten argued that if we start with the type iia string
and increase its coupling constant from a value much less than 1 to a value much greater than 1, the
physics we are still able to analyze (essentially that of the bps saturated configurations) has a low-
energy approximation that is eleven-dimensional supergravity.

when witten announced this discovery, it stunned the audience and it has since rocked the string
theory community. for almost everyone in the field, it was a completely unexpected development.
your first reaction to this result may echo that of most experts in the field: how can a theory specific
to eleven dimensions be relevant to a different theory in ten?

the  answer  is  of  deep  significance.  to  understand  it,  we  must  describe  witten's  result  more
precisely. actually, it's easier first to illustrate a closely related result discovered later by witten and
a  postdoctoral  fellow  at  princeton  university,  petr  horava,  that  focuses  on  the  heterotic-e  string.
they found that the strongly coupled heterotic-e string also has an eleven-dimensional description,
and figure 12.7 shows why. in the leftmost part of the figure, we take the heterotic-e string coupling
constant  to  be  much  smaller  than  1.  this  is  the  realm  that  we  have  been  describing  in  previous
chapters and that string theorists have studied for well over a decade. as we move to the right in
figure 12.7, we sequentially increase the size of the coupling constant. prior to 1995, string theorists
knew that this would make the loop processes (see figure 12.6) increasingly important and, as the
coupling constant got larger, would ultimately invalidate the whole perturbative framework. but what
no one suspected is that as the coupling constant is made larger, a new dimension becomes visible!
this  is  the  "vertical"  dimension  shown  in  figure  12.7.  bear  in  mind  that  in  this  figure  the  two-
dimensional  grid  with  which  we  begin  represents  all  nine  spatial  dimensions  of  the  heterotic-e
string. thus, the new, vertical dimension represents a tenth spatial dimension, which, together with
time, takes us to a total of eleven spacetime dimensions.

moreover, figure 12.7 illustrates a profound consequence of this new dimension. the structure
of the heterotic-e string changes as this dimension grows. it is stretched from a one-dimensional loop
into a ribbon and then a deformed cylinder as we increase the size of the coupling constant! in other

words,  the  heterotic-e  string  is actually a  two-dimensional  membrane  whose  width  (the  vertical
extent in figure 12.7) is controlled by the size of the coupling constant. for over a decade, string
theorists  have  always  used  perturbative  methods  that  are  firmly  rooted  in  the  assumption  that  the
coupling  constant  is  very  small.  as  argued  by  witten,  this  assumption  has  made  the  fundamental
ingredients look and behave like one-dimensional strings even though they actually have a hidden,
second  spatial  dimension.  by  relaxing  the  assumption  that  the  coupling  constant  is  very  small  and
considering  the  physics  of  the  heterotic-e  string  when  the  coupling  constant  is  large,  the  second
dimension becomes manifest.

figure 12.7 as the heterotic-e string coupling constant is increased, a new space dimension appears
and the string itself gets stretched into a cylindrical membrane shape.

this realization does not invalidate any of the conclusions we have drawn in previous chapters,
but it does force us to see them within a new framework. for instance, how does this all mesh with
the one time and nine space dimensions required by string theory? well, recall from chapter 8 that
this  constraint  arises  from  counting  the  number  of  independent  directions  in  which  a  string  can
vibrate, and requiring that this number be just right to ensure that quantum-mechanical probabilities
have sensible values. the new dimension we have just uncovered is not one in which a heterotic-e
string  can  vibrate,  since  it  is  a  dimension  that  is  locked  within  the  structure  of  the  "strings"
themselves.  put  another  way,  the  perturbative  framework  that  physicists  used  in  deriving  the
requirement  of  a  ten-dimensional  spacetime  assumed  from  the  outset  that  the  heterotic-e  coupling
constant  is  small.  although  it  was  not  recognized  until  much  later,  this  implicitly  enforced  two
mutually consistent approximations: that the width of the membrane in figure 12.7 is small, making it
look like a string, and that the eleventh dimension is so small that it is beyond the sensitivity of the
perturbative equations. within this approximation scheme, we are led to envision a ten-dimensional
universe  filled  with  one-dimensional  strings.  now  we  see  that  this  is  but  an  approximation  to  an
eleven-dimensional universe containing two-dimensional membranes.

for technical reasons, witten first came upon the eleventh dimension in his studies of the strong
coupling properties of the type iia string, and there the story is quite similar. as in the heterotic-e
example, there is an eleventh dimension whose size is controlled by the type iia coupling constant.
when its value is increased, the new dimension grows. as it does, witten argued, the type iia string,
rather  than  stretching  into  a  ribbon  as  in  the  heterotic-e  case,  expands  into  an  "inner  tube,"  as
illustrated in figure 12.8. once again, witten argued that although theorists have always viewed type
iia strings as one-dimensional objects, having only length but no thickness, this view is a reflection
of  the  perturbative  approximation  scheme  in  which  the  string  coupling  constant  is  assumed  to  be
small.  if  nature does  require  a  small  value  of  this  coupling  constant  then  it  is  a  trustworthy
approximation.  nevertheless,  witten's  arguments  and  those  of  other  physicists  during  the  second
superstring  revolution  do  give  strong  evidence  that  the  type  iia  and  heterotic-e  "strings"  are,
fundamentally, two-dimensional membranes living in an eleven-dimensional universe.

but  what is  this  eleven-dimensional  theory?  at  low  energies  (low  compared  to  the  planck

energy),  witten  and  others  argued,  it  is  approximated  by  the  long-neglected  eleven-dimensional
supergravity quantum field theory. but for higher energies, how can we describe this theory? this
topic  is  currently  under  intense  scrutiny.  we  know  from  figures  12.7  and  12.8  that  the  eleven-
dimensional theory contains two-dimensional extended objects—two-dimensional membranes. and
as we shall soon discuss, extended objects of other dimensions play an important role as well. but
beyond  a  hodgepodge  of  properties, no  one  knows  what  this  eleven-dimensional  theory  is.  are
membranes  its  fundamental  ingredients?  what  are  its  defining  properties?  how  does  it  purport  to
make contact with physics as we know it? if the respective coupling constants are small, our best
current  answers  to  these  questions  are  described  in  previous  chapters,  since  at  small  coupling
constants we are led back to the theory of strings. but if the coupling constants are not small, no one
currently knows the answers.

figure  12.8  as  the  type  iia  string  coupling  constant  is  increased,  strings  expand  from  one-
dimensional loops to two-dimensional objects that look like the surface of a bicycle-tire inner tube.

whatever  the  eleven-dimensional  theory  is,  witten  has  provisionally  named  it m-theory.  the
name stands for as many things as people you poll. some samples: mystery theory, mother theory
(as in "mother of all theories"), membrane theory (since, whatever it is, membranes seem to be part
of  the  story),  matrix  theory  (after  some  recent  work  by  tom  banks  of  rutgers  university,  willy
fischler of the university of texas at austin, stephen shenker of rutgers university, and susskind
that offers a novel interpretation of the theory). but even without having a firm grasp on its name or its
properties, it is already clear that m-theory provides a unifying substrate for pulling together all five
string theories.

m-theory and the web of interconnections

there is an old proverb about three blind men and an elephant. the first blind man grabs hold of the
elephant's ivory tusk and describes the smooth, hard surface that he feels. the second blind man grabs
hold of one of the elephant's legs. he describes the tough, muscular girth that he feels. the third blind
man grabs hold of the elephant's tail and describes the slender and sinewy appendage that he feels.
since their mutual descriptions are so different, and since none of the men can see the others, each
thinks that he has grabbed hold of a different animal. for many years, physicists were as much in the
dark as the blind men, thinking that the different string theories were very different. but now, through
the insights of the second superstring revolution, physicists have realized that m-theory is the unifying
pachyderm of the five string theories.

in this chapter we have discussed changes in our understanding of string theory that arise when
we venture beyond the domain of the perturbative framework—a framework implicitly in use prior to
this chapter. figure 12.9 summarizes the interrelations we have found so far, with arrows to indicate

dual  theories. as  you  can  see,  we  have  a  web  of  connections,  but  it  is  not  yet  complete.  by  also
including the dualities of chapter 10, we can finish the job.

recall the large/small circular radius duality that interchanges a circular dimension of radius r
with one whose radius is 1/r. previously, we glossed over one aspect of this duality, which we now
must  clarify.  in  chapter  10,  we  discussed  the  properties  of  strings  in  a  universe  with  a  circular
dimension without carefully specifying which of the five string formulations we were working with.
we  argued  that  the  interchange  of  winding  and  vibration  modes  of  a  string  allows  us  to  rephrase
exactly the string theoretic description of a universe with a circular dimension of radius 1/r in terms
of one in which the radius is r. the point we glossed over is that the type iia and type iib string
theories actually get exchanged by this duality, as do the heterotic-o and heterotic-e strings. that is,
the more precise statement of the large/small radius duality is this: the physics of the type iia string
in a universe with a circular dimension of radius r is absolutely identical to the physics of the type
iib string in a universe with a circular dimension of radius 1/r  (a  similar  statement  holds  for  the
heterotic-e  and  heterotic-o  strings).  this  refinement  of  the  large/small  radius  duality  has  no
significant effect on the conclusions of chapter 10, but it does have an important impact on the present
discussion.

figure 12.9 the arrows show which theories are dual to others.

the reason is that by providing a link between the type iia and type iib string theories, as well
as  between  the  heterotic-o  and  heterotic-e  theories,  the  large/small  radius  duality  completes  the
web of connections, as illustrated by the dotted lines in figure 12.10. this figure shows that all five
string theories, together with m-theory, are dual to one another. they are all sewn together into a
single theoretical framework; they provide five different approaches to describing one and the same
underlying  physics.  for  some  or  other  application,  one  phrasing  may  be  far  more  effective  than
another. for instance, it's far easier to work with the weakly coupled heterotic-o theory than it is to
work with the strongly coupled type i string. nevertheless, they describe exactly the same physics.

figure 12.10 by including the dualities involving the geometrical form of spacetime (as in chapter
10), all five of the string theories and m-theory are joined together in a web of dualities.

the overall picture

we can now more fully understand the two figures—figures 12.1 and 12.2—that we introduced in the
beginning of this chapter to summarize the essential points. in figure 12.1 we see that prior to 1995,

without  taking  any  dualities  into  account,  we  had  five  apparently  distinct  string  theories.  various
physicists worked on each, but without an understanding of the dualities they appeared to be different
theories. each of the theories had variable features such as the size of their coupling constant and the
geometrical form and sizes of curled-up dimensions. the hope was (and still is) that these defining
properties would be determined by the theory itself, but without the ability to determine them with the
current approximate equations, physicists have naturally studied the physics that follows from a range
of possibilities. this is represented in figure 12.1 by the shaded regions—each point in such a region
denotes one specific choice for the coupling constant and the curled-up geometry. without invoking
any dualities, we still have five disjointed (collections of) theories.

but now, if we apply all of the dualities we have discussed, then as we vary the coupling and
geometric parameters, we can pass from any one theory to any other, so long as we also include the
unifying central region of m-theory; this is shown in figure 12.2. even though we have only a scant
understanding of m-theory, these indirect arguments lend strong support to the claim that it provides a
unifying substrate for our five naively distinct string theories. moreover, we have learned that m-
theory is closely related to yet a sixth theory—eleven-dimensional supergravity—and this is recorded
in figure 12.11, a more precise version of figure 12.2.13

figure  12.11  illustrates  that  the  fundamental  ideas  and  equations  of  m-theory,  although  only
partially understood at the moment, unify those of all of the formulations of string theory. m-theory is
the  theoretical  elephant  that  has  opened  the  eyes  of  string  theorists  to  a  far  grander  unifying
framework.

figure 12.11 by incorporating the dualities, all five string theories, eleven-dimensional supergravity,
and m-theory are merged together into a unified framework.

a surprising feature of m-theory: democracy in extension

when the string coupling constant is small in any of the upper five peninsular regions of the theory
map in figure 12.11, the fundamental ingredient of the theory appears to be a one-dimensional string.
we  have,  however,  just  gained  a  new  perspective  on  this  observation.  if  we  start  in  either  the
heterotic-e or type iia regions and turn the value of the respective string coupling constants up, we
migrate  toward  the  center  of  the  map  in  figure  12.11,  and  what  appeared  to  be  one-dimensional
strings stretch into two-dimensional membranes. moreover, through a more or less intricate sequence

of duality relations involving both the string coupling constants and the detailed form of the curled-up
spatial dimensions, we can smoothly and continuously move from any point in figure 12.11 to any
other. since the two-dimensional membranes we have come upon from the heterotic-e and type iia
perspectives can be followed as we migrate to any of the three other string formulations in figure
12.11,  we  learn  that  each  of  the  five  string  formulations  involves  two-dimensional  membranes  as
well.

this raises two questions. first, are two-dimensional membranes the true fundamental ingredient
of string theory? and second, having made the bold leap in the 1970s and early 1980s from zero-
dimensional  point  particles  to  one-dimensional  strings,  and  having  now  seen  that  string  theory
actually  involves  two-dimensional  membranes,  might  it  be  that  there  are  even  higher-dimensional
ingredients  in  the  theory  as  well? as  of  this  writing,  the  answers  to  these  questions  are  not  fully
known, but the situation appears to be the following.

we relied heavily on supersymmetry to give us some understanding of each formulation of string
theory  beyond  the  domain  of  validity  of  perturbative  approximation  methods.  in  particular,  the
properties  of  bps  states,  their  masses  and  their  force  charges,  are  uniquely  determined  by
supersymmetry,  and  this  allowed  us  to  understand  some  of  their  strongly  coupled  characteristics
without having to perform direct calculations of unimaginable difficulty. in fact, through the initial
efforts of horowitz and strominger, and through subsequent groundbreaking work of polchinski, we
now know even more about these bps states. in particular, not only do we know their masses and the
force  charges  they  carry,  but  we  also  have  a  clear  understanding  of  what  they look  like. and  the
picture  is,  perhaps,  the  most  surprising  development  of  all.  some  of  the  bps  states  are  one-
dimensional strings. others are two-dimensional membranes. by now, these shapes are familiar. but,
the  surprise  is  that  yet  others  are three-dimensional, four-dimensional—in  fact,  the  range  of
possibilities  encompasses  every  spatial  dimension  up  to  and  including nine.  string  theory  or  m-
theory, or whatever it is finally called, actually contains extended objects of a whole slew of different
spatial  dimensions.  physicists  have  coined  the  term  three-brane  to  describe  extended  objects  with
three  spatial  dimensions,  four-brane  for  those  with  four  spatial  dimensions,  and  so  on  up  to  nine-
branes  (and,  more  generally,  for  an  object  with p  space  dimensions,  where p  represents  a  whole
number, physicists have coined the far from euphonious terminology p-brane). sometimes, using this
terminology, strings are described as one-branes, and membranes as two-branes. the fact that all of
these extended objects are actually part of the theory has led paul townsend to declare a "democracy
of branes."

notwithstanding brane democracy, strings—one-dimensional extended objects—are special for
the following reason. physicists have shown that the mass of the extended objects of every dimension
except  for  one-dimensional  strings  is inversely  proportional  to  the  value  of  the  associated  string
coupling constant when we are in any of the five string regions of figure 12.11. this means that with
weak string coupling, in any of the five formulations, all but the strings will be enormously massive—
orders of magnitude heavier than the planck mass. because they are so heavy and, therefore, from e =
mc2, require such unimaginably high energy to be produced, branes have only a small effect on much
of physics (but not on all, as we shall see in the next chapter). however, when we venture outside the
peninsular  regions  of  figure  12.11,  the  higher-dimensional  branes  become  lighter  and  hence
increasingly important.14

and  so,  the  image  you  should  have  in  mind  is  the  following.  in  the  central  region  of  figure
12.11, we have a theory whose fundamental ingredients are not just strings or membranes, but rather
"branes" of a variety of dimensions, all more or less on equal footing. currently, we do not have a

firm grasp on many essential features of this full theory. but one thing we do know is that as we move
from the central region to any of the peninsular regions, only the strings (or membranes curled up to
look  ever  more  like  strings,  as  in  figures  12.7  and  12.8)  are  light  enough  to  make  contact  with
physics as we know it—the particles of table 1.1 and the four forces through which they interact. the
perturbative analyses string theorists have made use of for close to two decades have not been refined
enough  to  discover  even  the  existence  of  the  super-massive  extended  objects  of  other  dimensions;
strings  dominated  the  analyses  and  the  theory  was  given  the  far-from-democratic  name  of  string
theory. again, in these regions of figure 12.11 we are justified, for most considerations, in ignoring
all but the strings. in essence, this is what we have done so far in this book. we see now, though, that
in actuality the theory is more rich than anyone previously imagined.

does any of this solve the unanswered questions in string theory?

yes and no. we have managed to deepen our understanding by breaking free of certain conclusions
that, in retrospect, were a consequence of perturbative approximate analyses rather than true string
physics.  but  the  current  scope  of  our  nonperturbative  tools  is  quite  limited.  the  discovery  of  the
remarkable web of duality relations affords us far greater insight into string theory, but many issues
remain  unresolved. at  present,  for  example,  we  do  not  know  how  to  go  beyond  the  approximate
equations  for  the  value  of  the  string  coupling  constant—equations  that,  as  we  have  seen,  are  too
coarse  to  give  us  any  useful  information.  nor  do  we  have  any  greater  insight  into  why  there  are
precisely  three  extended  spatial  dimensions,  or  how  to  choose  the  detailed  form  for  the  curled-up
dimensions. these questions require more sharply honed nonperturbative methods than we currently
possess.

what we do have is a far deeper understanding of the logical structure and theoretical reach of
string theory. prior to the realizations summarized in figure 12.11, the strong coupling behavior of
each  string  theory  was  a  black  box,  a  complete  mystery. as  on  maps  of  old,  the  realm  of  strong
coupling was uncharted territory, potentially filled with dragons and sea monsters. but now we see
that although the journey to strong coupling may take us through unfamiliar regions of m-theory, it
ultimately lands us back in the comfortable surrounds of weak coupling—albeit in the dual language
of what was once thought to be a different string theory.

duality and m-theory unite the five string theories and they suggest an important conclusion. it
may well be that there aren't other surprises, on par with the ones just discussed, that are awaiting our
discovery. once a cartographer can fill in every region on a spherical globe of the earth, the map is
done and geographical knowledge is complete. that's not to say explorations in antarctica or on an
isolated island in micronesia are without scientific or cultural merit. it only means that the age of
geographic discovery is over. the absence of blank spots on the globe ensures this. the "theory map"
of figure 12.11 plays a similar role for string theorists. it covers the entire range of theories that can
be reached by setting sail from any one of the five string constructions. although we are far from a
full understanding of the terra incognita of m-theory, there are no blank regions on the map. like the
cartographer, the string theorist can now claim with guarded optimism that the spectrum of logically
sound  theories  incorporating  the  essential  discoveries  of  the  past  century—special  and  general
relativity;  quantum  mechanics;  gauge  theories  of  the  strong,  weak,  and  electromagnetic  forces;
supersymmetry; extra dimensions of kaluza and klein—is fully mapped out by figure 12.11.

the challenge to the string theorist—or perhaps we should say the m-theorist—is to show that

some point on the theory map of figure 12.11 actually describes our universe. to do this requires
finding the full and exact equations whose solution will pick out this elusive point on the map, and
then  understanding  the  corresponding  physics  with  sufficient  precision  to  allow  comparisons  with
experiment. as witten has said, "understanding what m-theory really is—the physics it embodies—
would  transform  our  understanding  of  nature  at  least  as  radically  as  occurred  in  any  of  the  major
scientific upheavals of the past."15 this is the program for unification in the twenty-first century.

chapter 13

black holes: a string/m-theory perspective

the pre–string theory conflict between general relativity and quantum mechanics was an affront to
our visceral sense that the laws of nature should fit together in a seamless, coherent whole. but this
antagonism  was  more  than  a  towering  abstract  disjunction.  the  extreme  physical  conditions  that
occurred  at  the  moment  of  the  big  bang  and  that  prevail  within  black  holes cannot  be  understood
without  a  quantum  mechanical  formulation  of  the  gravitational  force.  with  the  discovery  of  string
theory, we now have a hope of solving these deep mysteries. in this and the next chapter, we describe
how far string theorists have gone toward understanding black holes and the origin of the universe.

black holes and elementary particles

at  first  sight  it's  hard  to  imagine  any  two  things  more  radically  different  than  black  holes  and
elementary  particles.  we  usually  picture  black  holes  as  the  most  gargantuan  of  heavenly  bodies,
whereas elementary particles are the most minute specks of matter. but the research of a number of
physicists during the late 1960s and early 1970s, including demetrios christodoulou, werner israel,
richard  price,  brandon  carter,  roy  kerr,  david  robinson,  hawking,  and  penrose,  showed  that
black holes and elementary particles are perhaps not as different as one might think. these physicists
found  increasingly  persuasive  evidence  for  what  john  wheeler  has  summarized  by  the  statement
"black holes have no hair." by this, wheeler meant that except for a small number of distinguishing
features, all black holes appear to be alike. the distinguishing features? one, of course, is the black
hole's mass. what are the others? research has revealed that they are the electric and certain other
force charges a black hole can carry, as well as the rate at which it spins. and that's it. any two black
holes with the same mass, force charges, and spin are completely identical. black holes do not have
fancy "hairdos"—that is, other intrinsic traits—that distinguish one from another. this should ring a
loud bell. recall that it is precisely such properties—mass, force charges, and spin—that distinguish
one  elementary  particle  from  another.  the  similarity  of  the  defining  traits  has  led  a  number  of
physicists  over  the  years  to  the  strange  speculation  that  black  holes  might  actually  be  gigantic
elementary particles.

in fact, according to einstein's theory, there is no minimum mass for a black hole. if we crush a
chunk of matter of any mass to a small enough size, a straightforward application of general relativity
shows that it will become a black hole. (the lighter the mass, the smaller we must crush it.) and so,
we can imagine a thought experiment in which we start with ever-lighter blobs of matter, crush them
into  ever-smaller  black  holes,  and  compare  the  properties  of  the  resulting  black  holes  with  the
properties of elementary particles. wheeler's no-hair statement leads us to conclude that for small
enough masses the black holes we form in this manner will look very much like elementary particles.
both will look like tiny bundles characterized completely by their mass, force charges, and spin.

but there is a catch. astrophysical black holes, with masses many times that of the sun, are so
large  and  heavy  that  quantum  mechanics  is  largely  irrelevant  and  only  the  equations  of  general
relativity need be used to understand their properties. (we are here discussing the overall structure of
the black hole, not the singular central point of collapse within a black hole, whose tiny size most
certainly  requires  a  quantum-mechanical  description.) as  we  try  to  make  ever  less  massive  black
holes, however, there comes a point when they are so light and small that quantum mechanics does
comes into play. this happens if the total mass of the black hole is about the planck mass or less.
(from the point of view of elementary particle physics, the planck mass is huge—some ten billion
billion times the mass of a proton. from the point of view of black holes, though, the planck mass,
being equal to that of an average grain of dust, is quite tiny.) and so, physicists who speculated that
tiny  black  holes  and  elementary  particles  might  be  closely  related  immediately  ran  up  against  the
incompatibility  between  general  relativity—the  theoretical  heart  of  black  holes—and  quantum
mechanics. in the past, the incompatibility stymied all progress in this intriguing direction.

does string theory allow us to go forward?

it  does.  through  a  fairly  unexpected  and  sophisticated  realization  of  black  holes,  string  theory
provides the first theoretically sound connection between black holes and elementary particles. the
road  to  this  connection  is  a  bit  circuitous,  but  it  takes  us  through  some  of  the  most  interesting
developments in string theory, making it a journey well worth taking.

it begins with a seemingly unrelated question that string theorists have kicked around since the
late  1980s.  mathematicians  and  physicists  have  long  known  that  when  six  spatial  dimensions  are
curled up into a calabi-yau shape, there are generally two kinds of spheres that are embedded within
the shape's fabric. one kind are the two-dimensional spheres, like the surface of a beach ball, that
played a vital role in the space-tearing flop transitions of chapter 11. the other kind are harder to
picture  but  they  are  equally  prevalent.  they  are three-dimensional  spheres—like  the  surfaces  of
beach balls adorning the sandy ocean shores of a universe with four extended space dimensions. of
course,  as  we  discussed  in  chapter  11,  an  ordinary  beach  ball  in  our  world  is  itself  a  three-
dimensional object, but its surface, just like the surface of a garden hose, is two-dimensional: you
need only two numbers—latitude and longitude, for instance—to locate any position on its surface.
but we are now imagining having one more space dimension: a four-dimensional beach ball whose
surface  is three-dimensional. as it's pretty close to impossible to picture such a beach ball in your
mind's  eye,  for  the  most  part  we  will  appeal  to  lower-dimensional  analogs  that  are  more  easily
visualized.  but,  as  we  shall  now  see,  one  aspect  of  the  three-dimensional  nature  of  the  spherical
surfaces is of prime importance.

by studying the equations of string theory, physicists realized that it is possible, and even likely,
that  as  time  evolves,  these  three-dimensional  spheres  will  shrink—collapse—to  vanishingly  small
volume. but what would happen, string theorists asked, if the fabric of space were to collapse in this
manner? will there be some catastrophic effect from this kind of pinching of the spatial fabric? this
is  much  like  the  question  we  posed  and  resolved  in  chapter  11,  but  here  we  are  focusing  on
collapsing three-dimensional spheres, whereas in chapter 11 we focused solely on collapsing two-
dimensional spheres. (as in chapter 11, since we are envisioning that a piece of a calabi-yau shape
is  shrinking,  as  opposed  to  the  whole  calabi-yau  shape  itself,  the  small  radius/large  radius
identification of chapter 10 does not apply.) here is the essential qualitative difference arising from

the change in dimension.1 we recall from chapter 11 that a pivotal realization is that strings, as they
move through space, can lasso a two-dimensional sphere. that is, their two-dimensional world-sheet
can  fully  surround  a  two-dimensional  sphere,  as  in  figure  11.6.  this  proves  to  be  just  enough
protection to keep a collapsing, pinching two-dimensional sphere from causing physical catastrophes.
but now we are looking at the other kind of sphere inside a calabi-yau space, and it has too many
dimensions for it to be surrounded by a moving string. if you have trouble seeing this, it is perfectly
okay  to  think  of  the  analogy  obtained  by  lowering  all  dimensions  by  one. you  can  picture  three-
dimensional spheres as if they are two-dimensional surfaces of ordinary beach balls, so long as you
also picture one-dimensional strings as if they are zero-dimensional point particles. then, in analogy
with the fact that a zero-dimensional point-particle cannot lasso anything, let alone a two-dimensional
sphere, a one-dimensional string cannot lasso a three-dimensional sphere.

such  reasoning  led  string  theorists  to  speculate  that  if  a  three-dimensional  sphere  inside  a
calabi-yau  space  were  to  collapse,  something  that  the  approximate  equations  showed  to  be  a
perfectly possible if not commonplace evolution in string theory, it might yield a cataclysmic result.
in  fact,  the  approximate  equations  of  string  theory  developed  prior  to  the  mid-1990s  seemed  to
indicate that the workings of the universe would grind to a halt if such a collapse were to occur; they
indicated that certain of the infinities tamed by string theory would be unleashed by such a pinching of
the  spatial  fabric.  for  a  number  of  years,  string  theorists  had  to  live  with  this  disturbing,  albeit
inconclusive, state of understanding. but in 1995, andrew strominger showed that these doomsaying
speculations were wrong.

time later.

strominger,  following  earlier  groundbreaking  work  of  witten  and  seiberg,  made  use  of  the
realization that string theory, when analyzed with the newfound precision of the second superstring
revolution,  is  not  just  a  theory  of  one-dimensional  strings.  he  reasoned  as  follows.  a  one-
dimensional string—a one-brane in the newer language of the field—can completely surround a one-
dimensional piece of space, like a circle, as we illustrate in figure 13.1. (notice that this is different
from  figure  11.6,  in  which  a  one-dimensional  string,  as  it  moves  through  time,  lassos  a  two-
dimensional  sphere.  figure  13.1  should  be  viewed  as  a  snapshot  taken  at  one  instant  in  time.)
similarly, in figure 13.1 we see that a two-dimensional membrane—a two-brane—can wrap around
and  completely  cover  a  two-dimensional  sphere,  much  as  a  piece  of  plastic  wrap  can  be  tightly
wrapped around the surface of an orange. although it's harder to visualize, strominger followed the
pattern  and  realized  that  the  newly  discovered  three-dimensional  ingredients  in  string  theory—the
three-branes—can wrap around and completely cover a three-dimensional sphere. having seen clear
to  this  insight,  strominger  then  showed,  with  a  simple  and  standard  physics  calculation,  that  the
wrapped  three-brane  provides  a  tailor-made  shield  that  exactly  cancels  all  of  the  potentially
cataclysmic  effects  that  string  theorists  had  previously  feared  would  occur  if  a  three-dimensional
sphere were to collapse.

this was a wonderful and important insight. but its full power was not revealed until a short

figure 13.1 a  string  can  encircle  a  one-dimensional  curled-up  piece  of  the  spatial  fabric;  a  two-
dimensional membrane can wrap around a two-dimensional piece.

tearing the fabric of space—with conviction

one  of  the  most  exciting  things  about  physics  is  how  the  state  of  knowledge  can  change  literally
overnight. the morning after strominger posted his paper on the electronic internet archive, i read it
in my office at cornell after having retrieved it from the world wide web. in one stroke, strominger
had  made  use  of  the  exciting  new  insights  of  string  theory  to  resolve  one  of  the  thorniest  issues
surrounding the curling up of extra dimensions into a calabi-yau space. but as i pondered his paper,
it struck me that he might have worked out only half of the story.

in the earlier space-tearing flop-transition work described in chapter 11, we had studied a two-
part process in which a two-dimensional sphere pinches down to a point, causing the fabric of space
to tear, and then the two-dimensional sphere reinflates in a new way, thereby repairing the tear. in
strominger's paper, he had studied what happens when a three-dimensional sphere pinches down to a
point, and had shown that the newfound extended objects in string theory ensure that physics continues
to be perfectly well behaved. but that's where his paper stopped. might it be that there was another
half  to  the  story,  involving,  once  again,  the  tearing  of  space  and  its  subsequent  repair  through  the
reinflation of spheres?

dave morrison was visiting me at cornell during the spring term of 1995, and that afternoon we
got together to discuss strominger's paper. within a couple of hours we had an outline of what the
"second  half  of  the  story"  might  look  like.  drawing  on  some  insights  from  the  late  1980s  of  the
mathematicians herb clemens of the university of utah, robert friedman of columbia university,
and miles reid of the university of warwick, as applied by candelas, green, and tristan hübsch,
then of the university of texas at austin, we realized that when a three-dimensional sphere collapses,
it may be possible for the calabi-yau space to tear and subsequently repair itself by reinflating the
sphere. but there is an important surprise. whereas the sphere that collapsed had three dimensions,
the one that reinflates has only two. it's hard to picture what this looks like, but we can get an idea by
focusing on a lower-dimensional analogy. rather than the hard-to-picture case of a three-dimensional
sphere collapsing and being replaced by a two-dimensional sphere, let's imagine a one- dimensional
sphere collapsing and being replaced by a zero-dimensional sphere.

figure 13.2 spheres of dimensions that can be easily visualized—those of (a) two, (b) one, and (c)
zero dimensions.

first of all, what are one-and zero-dimensional spheres? well, let's reason by analogy. a two-
dimensional sphere is the collection of points in three-dimensional space that are the same distance

from a chosen center, as shown in figure 13.2(a). by following the same idea, a one-dimensional
sphere is the collection of points in two-dimensional space (the surface of this page, for example) that
are the same distance from a chosen center. as shown in figure 13.2(b), this is nothing but a circle.
finally,  following  the  pattern,  a  zero-dimensional  sphere  is  the  collection  of  points  in  a  one-
dimensional  space  (a  line)  that  are  the  same  distance  from  a  chosen  center. as  shown  in  figure
13.2(c),  this  amounts  to two points,  with  the  "radius"  of  the  zero-dimensional  sphere  equal  to  the
distance each point is from their common center. and so, the lower-dimensional analogy alluded to in
the preceding paragraph involves a circle (a one-dimensional sphere) pinching down, followed by
space tearing, and then being replaced by a zero-dimensional sphere (two points). figure 13.3 puts
this abstract idea into practice.

we  imagine  beginning  with  the  surface  of  a  doughnut,  in  which  a  one-dimensional  sphere  (a
circle)  is  embedded,  as  highlighted  in  figure  13.3.  now,  let's  imagine  that  as  time  goes  by,  the
highlighted circle collapses, causing the fabric of space to pinch. we can repair the pinch by allowing
the fabric to momentarily tear, and then replacing the pinched one-dimensional sphere—the collapsed
circle—with  a  zero-dimensional  sphere—two  points—plugging  the  holes  in  the  upper  and  lower
portions of the shape arising from the tear. as shown in figure 13.3, the resulting shape looks like a
warped banana, which through gentle deformation (non–space tearing) can be reshaped smoothly into
the surface of a beach ball. we see, therefore, that when a one-dimensional sphere collapses and is
replaced by a zero-dimensional sphere, the topology of the original doughnut, that is, its fundamental
shape,  is  drastically  altered.  in  the  context  of  the  curled-up  spatial  dimensions,  the  space-tearing
progression  of  figure  13.3  would  result  in  the  universe  depicted  in  figure  8.8  evolving  into  that
depicted in figure 8.7.

figure 13.3 a circular piece of a doughnut (a torus) collapses to a point. the surface tears open,
yielding  two  puncture  holes. a  zero-dimensional  sphere  (two  points)  is  "glued  in,"  replacing  the
original  one-dimensional  sphere  (the  circle)  and  repairing  the  torn  surface.  this  allows  a
transformation to a completely different shape—a beach ball.

although this is a lower-dimensional analogy, it captures the essential features of what morrison
and  i  foresaw  for  the  second  half  of  strominger's  story. after  the  collapse  of  a  three-dimensional
sphere inside a calabi-yau space, it seemed to us that space could tear and subsequently repair itself
by growing a two-dimensional sphere, leading to far more drastic changes in topology than witten
and we had found in our earlier work (discussed in chapter 11). in this way, one calabi-yau shape
could,  in  essence,  transform  itself  into  a  completely  different  calabi-yau  shape—much  like  the
doughnut  transforming  into  the  beach  ball  in  figure  13.3—while  string  physics  remained  perfectly
well behaved. although a picture was starting to emerge, we knew that there were significant aspects
that we would need to work out before we could establish that our second half of the story did not
introduce any singularities—that is, pernicious and physically unacceptable consequences. we each
went home that evening with the tentative elation that we were sitting on a major new insight.

a flurry of e-mail

the next morning i received an e-mail from strominger asking me for any comments or reactions to
his  paper.  he  mentioned  that  "it  should  tie  in  somehow  with  your  work  with  aspinwall  and
morrison,"  because,  as  it  turned  out,  he  too  had  been  exploring  a  possible  connection  to  the
phenomenon  of  topology  change.  i  immediately  sent  him  an  e-mail  describing  the  rough  outline
morrison  and  i  had  come  up  with.  when  he  responded,  it  was  clear  that  his  level  of  excitement
matched what morrison and i had been riding since the preceding day.

during the next few days a continuous stream of e-mail messages circulated between the three of
us as we sought feverishly to put quantitative rigor behind our idea of drastic space-tearing topology
change. slowly but surely, all the details fell into place. by the following wednesday, a week after
strominger posted his initial insight, we had a draft of a joint paper spelling out the dramatic new
transformation of the spatial fabric that can follow the collapse of a three-dimensional sphere.

strominger was scheduled to give a seminar at harvard the next day, and so left santa barbara
in the early morning. we agreed that morrison and i would continue to fine-tune the paper and then
submit it to the electronic archive that evening. by 11:45 p.m., we had checked and rechecked our
calculations and everything seemed to hang together perfectly. and so, we electronically submitted
our paper and headed out of the physics building. as morrison and i walked toward my car (i was
going to drive him to the house he had rented for the term) our discussion turned to one of devil's
advocacy, in which we imagined the harshest criticisms that someone determined not to accept our
results might level. as we drove out of the parking lot and left the campus, we realized that although
our arguments were strong and convincing, they were not thoroughly airtight. neither of us felt that
there was any real chance that our work was wrong, but we did recognize that the strength of our
claims and the particular wording we had chosen at a few points in the paper might leave the ideas
open to rancorous debate, potentially obscuring the importance of the results. we agreed that it might
have been better had we written the paper in a somewhat lower key, underplaying the depth of the
claims,  and  allowing  the  physics  community  to  judge  the  paper  on  its  merits,  rather  than  possibly
reacting to the form of its presentation.

as we drove on, morrison reminded me that under the rules of the electronic archive we could
revise our paper until 2 a.m., when it would then be released for public internet access. i immediately
turned the car around and we drove back to the physics building, retrieved our initial submission, and
set to work on toning down the prose. thankfully, it was quite easy to do. a few word changes in
critical  paragraphs  softened  the  edge  of  our  claims  without  compromising  the  technical  content.
within an hour, we resubmitted the paper, and agreed not to talk about it at all during the drive to
morrison's house.

by  early  the  next  afternoon  it  was  evident  that  the  response  to  our  paper  was  enthusiastic.
among the many e-mail responses was one from plesser, who gave us one of the highest compliments
one physicist can give another by declaring, "i wish that i had thought of that!" notwithstanding our
fears the previous night, we had convinced the string theory community that not only can the fabric of
space undergo the mild tears discovered earlier (chapter 11), but that far more drastic rips, roughly
illustrated by figure 13.3, can occur as well.

returning to black holes and elementary particles

what does this have to do with black holes and elementary particles? a lot. to see this, we must ask
ourselves the same question we posed in chapter 11. what are the observable physical consequences
of such tears in the fabric of space? for flop transitions, as we have seen, the surprising answer to
this question was that not much happens at all. for conifold transitions—the technical name for the
drastic space-tearing transitions we had now found—there is, once again, no physical catastrophe (as
there  would  be  in  conventional  general  relativity),  but  there  are  more  pronounced  observable
consequences.

two related notions underlie these observable consequences; we will explain each in turn. first,
as we have discussed, strominger's initial breakthrough was his realization that a three-dimensional
sphere inside a calabi-yau space can collapse without an ensuing disaster, because a three-brane
wrapped  around  it  provides  a  perfect  protective  shield.  but  what  does  such  a  wrapped-brane
configuration look like? the answer comes from earlier work of horowitz and strominger, which
showed that to persons such as ourselves who are directly cognizant only of the three extended spatial
dimensions, the three-brane "smeared" around the three-dimensional sphere will set up a gravitational
field that looks like that of a black hole.2 this is not obvious and becomes clear only from a detailed
study  of  the  equations  governing  the  branes.  again,  it's  hard  to  draw  such  higher-dimensional
configurations accurately on a page, but figure 13.4 conveys the rough idea with a lower-dimensional
analogy  involving  two-dimensional  spheres.  we  see  that  a  two-dimensional  membrane  can  smear
itself around a two-dimensional sphere (which itself is sitting inside a calabi-yau space positioned
at  some  location  in  the  extended  dimensions).  someone  looking  through  the  extended  dimensions
toward  this  location  will  sense  the  wrapped  brane  by  its  mass  and  the  force  charges  it  carries,
properties  that  horowitz  and  strominger  had  shown  would  look  just  like  those  of  a  black  hole.
moreover, in strominger's 1995 breakthrough paper, he argued that the mass of the three-brane—the
mass  of  the  black  hole,  that  is—is  proportional  to  the  volume  of  the  three-dimensional  sphere  it
wraps:  the  bigger  the  volume  of  the  sphere,  the  bigger  the  three-brane  must  be  in  order  to  wrap
around  it,  and  the  more  massive  it  becomes.  similarly,  the  smaller  the  volume  of  the  sphere,  the
smaller the mass of the three-brane that wraps it. as this sphere collapses, then, a three-brane that
wraps around the sphere, which is perceived as a black hole, appears to become ever lighter. when
the three-dimensional sphere has collapsed to a pinched point, the corresponding black hole—brace
yourself—is massless. although it sounds completely mysterious—what in the world is a massless
black hole?—we will soon connect this enigma with more familiar string physics.

figure 13.4 when a brane wraps around a sphere that is within the curled-up dimensions, it appears
as a black hole in the familiar extended dimensions.

the second ingredient we need to recall is that the number of holes in a calabi-yau shape, as
discussed in chapter 9, determines the number of low-energy, and hence low-mass, vibrational string
patterns,  the  patterns  that  can  possibly  account  for  the  particles  in  table  1.1  as  well  as  the  force
carriers. since the space-tearing conifold transitions change the number of holes (as, for example in
figure  13.3,  in  which  the  hole  of  the  doughnut  is  eliminated  by  the  tearing/repairing  process),  we
expect a change in the number of low-mass vibrational patterns. indeed, when morrison, strominger,
and  i  studied  this  in  detail,  we  found  that  as  a  new  two-dimensional  sphere  replaces  the  pinched
three-dimensional  sphere  in  the  curled-up  calabi-yau  dimensions,  the  number  of  massless  string
vibrational patterns increases by exactly one. (the example of the doughnut turning into a beach ball
in figure 13.3 would lead you to believe that the number of holes—and thus the number of patterns—
decreases, but this proves to be a misleading property of the lower-dimensional analogy.)

to combine the observations of the preceding two paragraphs, imagine a sequence of snapshots
of a calabi-yau space in which the size of a particular three-dimensional sphere gets smaller and
smaller.  the  first  observation  implies  that  a  three-brane  wrapping  around  this  three-dimensional
sphere—which appears to us as a black hole—will have ever smaller mass until, at the final point of
collapse, it will be massless. but, as we asked above, what does this mean? the answer became
clear to us by invoking the second observation. our work showed that the new massless pattern of
string vibration arising from the space-tearing conifold transition is the microscopic description of a
massless particle into which the black hole has transmuted.  we  concluded  that  as  a  calabi-yau
shape goes through a space-tearing conifold transition, an initially massive black hole becomes ever
lighter until it is massless and then it transmutes into a massless particle—such as a massless photon
—which in string theory is nothing but a single string executing a particular vibrational pattern. in this
way,  for  the  first  time,  string  theory  explicitly  establishes  a  direct,  concrete,  and  quantitatively
unassailable connection between black holes and elementary particles.

"melting" black holes

the  connection  between  black  holes  and  elementary  particles  which  we  found  is  closely  akin  to
something we are all familiar with from day-to-day life, known technically as a phase transition. a
simple example of a phase transition is the one we mentioned in the last chapter: water can exist as a
solid (ice), as a liquid (liquid water), and a gas (steam). these are known as the phases of water, and
the transformation from one form to another is called a phase transition. morrison, strominger, and i
showed that there is a tight mathematical and physical analogy between such phase transitions and the
space-tearing conifold transitions from one calabi-yau shape to another. again, just as someone who
has never before encountered liquid water or solid ice would not immediately recognize that they are
two phases of the same underlying substance, physicists had not realized previously that the kinds of
black  holes  we  were  studying  and  elementary  particles  are  actually  two  phases  of  the  same
underlying  stringy  material.  whereas  the  surrounding  temperature  determines  the  phase  in  which
water will exist, the topological form—the shape—of the extra calabi-yau dimensions determines
whether  certain  physical  configurations  within  string  theory  appear  as  black  holes  or  elementary
particles. that is, in the first phase, the initial calabi-yau shape (the analog of the ice phase, say), we
find that there are certain black holes present. in the second phase, the second calabi-yau shape (the
analog of the liquid water phase), these black holes have gone through a phase transition—they have
"melted"  so  to  speak—into  fundamental  vibrational  string  patterns.  the  tearing  of  space  through

conifold transitions takes us from one calabi-yau phase to the other. in so doing, we see that black
holes and elementary particles, like water and ice, are two sides of the same coin. we see that black
holes snugly fit within the framework of string theory.

we have purposely used the same water analogy for these drastic space-tearing transmutations
and for the transmutations from one of the five formulations of string theory to another (chapter 12)
because they are deeply connected. recall that we expressed through figure 12.11 that the five string
theories  are  dual  to  one  another  and  thereby  are  unified  under  the  rubric  of  a  single  overarching
theory. but does the ability to move continuously from one description to another—to set sail from
any  point  on  the  map  of  figure  12.11  and  reach  any  other—persist  even  after  we  allow  the  extra
dimensions to curl up into some calabi-yau shape or another? prior to the discovery of the drastic
topology-changing  results,  the  anticipated  answer  was  no,  since  there  was  no  known  way  to
continuously deform one calabi-yau shape into any other. but now we see that the answer is yes:
through these physically sensible space-tearing conifold transitions, we can continuously change any
given  calabi-yau  space  into  any  other.  by  varying  coupling  constants  and  curled-up  calabi-yau
geometry,  we  see  that  all  string  constructions  are,  once  again,  different  phases  of  a  single  theory.
even after curling up all extra dimensions, the unity of figure 12.11 firmly holds.

black hole entropy

for many years, some of the most accomplished theoretical physicists speculated about the possibility
of  space-tearing  processes  and  of  a  connection  between  black  holes  and  elementary  particles.
although such speculations might have sounded like science fiction at first, the discovery of string
theory, with its ability to merge general relativity and quantum mechanics, has allowed us now to
plant these possibilities firmly at the forefront of cutting-edge science. this success emboldens us to
ask  whether  any  of  the  other  mysterious  properties  of  our  universe  that  have  stubbornly  resisted
resolution for decades might also succumb to the powers of string theory. foremost among these is the
notion of black hole entropy. this is the arena in which string theory has most impressively flexed its
muscles, successfully solving a quarter-century-old problem of profound significance.

entropy is a measure of disorder or randomness. for instance, if your desk is cluttered high with
layer upon layer of open books, half-read articles, old newspapers, and junk mail, it is in a state of
high disorder, or high entropy. on the other hand, if it is fully organized with articles in alphabetized
folders, newspapers neatly stacked in chronological order, books arranged in alphabetical order by
author,  and  pens  placed  in  their  designated  holders,  your  desk  is  in  state  of  high  order  or,
equivalently, low  entropy.  this  example  illustrates  the  essential  idea,  but  physicists  have  given  a
fully  quantitative  definition  to  entropy  that  allows  one  to  describe  something's  entropy  by  using  a
definite numerical value: larger numbers mean greater entropy, smaller numbers mean less entropy.
although  the  details  are  a  little  complicated,  this  number,  roughly  speaking,  counts  the  possible
rearrangements of the ingredients in a given physical system that leave its overall appearance intact.
when your desk is neat and clean, almost any rearrangement—changing the order of the newspapers,
books, or articles, moving the pens from their holders—will disturb its highly ordered organization.
this  accounts  for  its  having  low  entropy.  on  the  contrary,  when  your  desk  is  a  mess,  numerous
rearrangements of the newspapers, articles, and junk mail will leave it a mess and therefore will not
disturb its overall appearance. this accounts for its having high entropy.

of  course,  a  description  of  rearranging  books,  articles,  and  newspapers  on  a  desktop—and

deciding which rearrangements "leave its overall appearance intact"—lacks scientific precision. the
rigorous  definition  of  entropy  actually  involves  counting  or  calculating  the  number  of  possible
rearrangements of the microscopic quantum-mechanical properties of the elementary constituents of a
physical system that do not affect its gross macroscopic properties (such as its energy or pressure).
the  details  are  not  essential  so  long  as  you  realize  that  entropy  is  a  fully  quantitative  quantum-
mechanical concept that precisely measures the overall disorder of a physical system.

in  1970,  jacob  bekenstein,  then  a  graduate  student  of  john  wheeler's  at  princeton,  made  an
audacious suggestion. he put forward the remarkable idea that black holes might have entropy—and a
huge  amount  of  it.  bekenstein  was  motivated  by  the  venerable  and  well-tested second  law  of
thermodynamics,  which  declares  that  the  entropy  of  a  system  always  increases:  everything  tends
toward  greater  disorder.  even  if  you  clean  your  cluttered  desk,  decreasing  its  entropy,  the  total
entropy, including that of your body and the air in the room, actually increases. you see, to clean your
desk you have to expend energy; you have to disrupt some of the orderly molecules of fat in your body
to create this energy for your muscles, and as you clean, your body gives off heat, which jostles the
surrounding air molecules into a higher state of agitation and disorder. when all of these effects are
accounted  for,  they  more  than  compensate  for  your  desk's  decrease  in  entropy,  and  thus  the  total
entropy increases.

but what happens, bekenstein in effect asked, if you clean your desk near the event horizon of a
black hole and you set up a vacuum pump to suck all of the newly agitated air molecules from the
room into the hidden depths of the black hole's interior? we can be even more extreme: what if the
vacuum pumps all the air, and all the contents on the desk, and even the desk itself into the black hole,
leaving you in a cold, airless, thoroughly ordered room? since the entropy in your room has certainly
decreased, bekenstein reasoned that the only way to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics would
be for the black hole to have entropy, and for this entropy to sufficiently increase as matter is pumped
into it to offset the observed entropic decrease outside the black hole's exterior.

in fact, bekenstein was able to draw on a famous result of stephen hawking's to strengthen his
case. hawking had shown that the area of the event horizon of a black hole—recall, this is the surface
of no return that enshrouds every black hole—always increases in any physical interaction. hawking
demonstrated that if an asteroid falls into a black hole, or if some of the surface gas of a nearby star
accretes onto the black hole, or if two black holes collide and combine—in any of these processes
and  all  others  as  well,  the  total  area  of  the  event  horizon  of  a  black  hole  always  increases.  to
bekenstein,  the  inexorable  evolution  to  greater  total  area  suggested  a  link  with  the  inexorable
evolution to greater total entropy embodied in the second law of thermodynamics. he proposed that
the area of the event horizon of a black hole provides a precise measure of its entropy.

on closer inspection, though, there are two reasons why most physicists thought that bekenstein's
idea could not be right. first, black holes would seem to be among the most ordered and organized
objects in the whole universe. once one measures the black hole's mass, the force charges it carries,
and its spin, its identity has been nailed down precisely. with so few defining features, a black hole
appears to lack sufficient structure to allow for disorder. just as there is little havoc one can wreak
on a desktop that holds solely a book and a pencil, black holes seem too simple to support disorder.
the  second  reason  that  bekenstein's  proposal  was  hard  to  swallow  is  that  entropy,  as  we  have
discussed it here, is a quantum-mechanical concept, whereas black holes, until recently, were firmly
entrenched in the antagonistic camp of classical general relativity. in the early 1970s, without a way
to  merge  general  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics,  it  seemed  awkward,  at  best,  to  discuss  the
possible entropy of a black hole.

how black is black?

as it turns out, hawking too had thought of the analogy between his black hole area-increase law and
the law of inevitable increase of entropy, but he dismissed it as nothing more than a coincidence.
after  all,  hawking  argued,  based  upon  his  area-increase  law  and  other  results  he  had  found  with
james bardeen and brandon carter, if one did take the analogy between the laws of black holes and
the laws of thermodynamics seriously, not only would one be forced to identify the area of the black
hole's event horizon with entropy, but it turns out that one would also have to assign a temperature to
the black hole (with the precise value determined by the strength of the black hole's gravitational field
at its event horizon). but if a black hole has a nonzero temperature—no matter how small—the most
basic  and  well-established  physical  principles  would require  it  to  emit  radiation,  much  like  a
glowing poker. but black holes, as everyone knows, are black; they supposedly do not emit anything.
hawking  and  most  everyone  else  agreed  that  this  definitively  ruled  out  bekenstein's  suggestion.
instead, hawking was willing to accept that if matter carrying entropy is dropped into a black hole,
this entropy is lost, plain and simple. so much for the second law of thermodynamics.

this  was  the  case  until  hawking,  in  1974,  discovered  something  truly  amazing.  black  holes,
hawking announced, are not completely black. if one ignores quantum mechanics and invokes only
the laws of classical general relativity, then as originally found some six decades previously, black
holes  certainly  do  not  allow  anything—not  even  light—to  escape  their  gravitational  grip.  but  the
inclusion of quantum mechanics modifies this conclusion in a profound way. even though he was not
in possession of a quantum-mechanical version of general relativity, hawking was able to finesse a
partial union of these two theoretical tools that yielded some limited yet reliable results. and the most
important result he found was that black holes do emit radiation, quantum mechanically.

the calculations are long and arduous, but hawking's basic idea is simple. we have seen that
the uncertainty principle ensures that even the vacuum of empty space is a teeming, roiling frenzy of
virtual particles momentarily erupting into existence and subsequently annihilating one another. this
jittery quantum behavior also occurs in the region of space just outside the event horizon of a black
hole. hawking realized, however, that the gravitational might of the black hole can inject energy into
a pair of virtual photons, say, that tears them just far enough apart so that one gets sucked into the
hole. with its partner having disappeared into the abyss of the hole, the other photon of the pair no
longer has a partner with which to annihilate. instead, hawking showed that the remaining photon gets
an energy boost from the gravitational force of the black hole and, as its partner falls inward, it gets
shot outward, away from the black hole. hawking realized that to someone looking at the black hole
from the safety of afar, the combined effect of this tearing apart of virtual photon pairs, happening
over  and  over  again  all  around  the  horizon  of  the  black  hole,  will  appear  as  a  steady  stream  of
outgoing radiation. black holes glow.

moreover,  hawking  was  able  to  calculate  the  temperature  that  a  far-off  observer  would
associate with the emitted radiation and found that it is given by the strength of the gravitational field
at the black hole's horizon, exactly as the analogy between the laws of black hole physics and the
laws of thermodynamics suggested.3 bekenstein was right: hawking's results showed that the analogy
should be taken seriously. in fact, these results showed that it is much more than an analogy—it is an
identity. a black hole has entropy. a black hole has temperature. and the gravitational laws of black
hole  physics  are  nothing  but  a  rewriting  of  the  laws  of  thermodynamics  in  an  extremely  exotic
gravitational context. this was hawking's 1974 bombshell.

to give you a sense of the scales involved, it turns out that when one carefully accounts for all of

the details, a black hole whose mass is about three times that of the sun has a temperature of about a
hundred-millionth of a degree above absolute zero. it's not zero, but only just. black holes are not
black,  but  only  barely.  unfortunately,  this  makes  a  black  hole's  emitted  radiation  meager,  and
impossible to detect experimentally. there is, however, an exception. hawking's calculations also
showed that the less massive a black hole is, the higher its temperature and the greater the radiation it
emits. for instance, a black hole as light as a small asteroid would emit about as much radiation as a
million-megaton  hydrogen  bomb,  with  radiation  concentrated  in  the  gamma-ray  part  of  the
electromagnetic spectrum. astronomers have searched the night sky for such radiation, but except for
a few long-shot possibilities they have come up empty-handed, a likely indication that such low-mass
black holes, if they exist, are very rare.4 as hawking often jokingly points out, this is too bad, for if
the  black  hole  radiation  that  his  work  predicts  were  to  be  detected,  he  would  undoubtedly  win  a
nobel prize.5

by contrast with its tiny, sub-millionth of a degree temperature, when one calculates the entropy
of, say, a three-solar-mass black hole, the result is an absolutely enormous number: a one followed by
about 78 zeros! and the more massive the hole, the greater the entropy. the success of hawking's
calculations  unequivocally  established  that  this  truly  reflects  the  enormous  amount  of  disorder
embodied by a black hole.

but disorder of what? as we have seen, black holes appear to be terribly simple objects, so
what  is  the  source  of  this  overwhelming  disorder?  on  this  question,  hawking's  calculations  were
completely silent. his partial merger of general relativity and quantum mechanics could be used to
find the numerical value of a black hole's entropy, but offered no insight into its microscopic meaning.
for nearly a quarter of a century, some of the greatest physicists tried to understand what possible
microscopic properties of black holes could account for their entropy. but without a fully trustworthy
amalgam  of  quantum  mechanics  and  general  relativity,  glimpses  of  an  answer  may  have  been
uncovered, but the mystery remained unsolved.

enter string theory

or, it did until january 1996, when strominger and vafa—building on earlier insights of susskind and
sen—released  a  paper  to  the  electronic  physics  archive  entitled  "microscopic  origin  of  the
beckenstein-hawking entropy." in this work, strominger and vafa were able to use string theory to
identify the microscopic constituents of a certain class of black holes and to calculate precisely their
associated entropy. their work relied on the newfound ability to partially circumvent the perturbative
approximations in use during the 1980s and early 1990s, and the result they found agreed exactly with
that predicted by bekenstein and hawking, finally completing a picture partially painted more than
two decades previously.

strominger and vafa focused on the class of so-called extremal black holes. these are black
holes that are imbued with charge—you can think of it as electric charge—and that, moreover, have
the minimal possible mass consistent with the charge they carry. as can be seen from this definition,
they  are  closely  related  to  the  bps  states  discussed  in  chapter  12.  in  fact,  strominger  and  vafa
exploited this similarity to the hilt. they showed that they could build—theoretically, of course—
certain  extremal  black  holes  by  starting  with  a  particular  collection  of  bps  branes  (of  certain
specified  dimensions)  and  binding  them  together  according  to  a  precise  mathematical  blueprint.  in
much  the  same  way  that  an  atom  can  be  built—theoretically,  again—by  starting  with  a  bunch  of

quarks  and  electrons  and  then  precisely  arranging  them  into  protons  and  neutrons,  surrounded  by
orbiting  electrons,  strominger  and  vafa  showed  how  some  of  the  newfound  ingredients  in  string
theory could similarly be molded together to yield particular black holes.

in  actuality,  black  holes  are  one  possible  end  product  of  stellar  evolution.  after  a  star  has
burned all its nuclear fuel through billions of years of atomic fusion, it no longer has the strength—the
outward-directed  pressure—to  withstand  the  enormous  inward  force  of  gravity.  under  a  broad
spectrum  of  conditions,  this  results  in  a  cataclysmic  implosion  of  the  star's  enormous  mass;  it
violently collapses under its own tremendous weight, forming a black hole. contrary to this realistic
means of formation, strominger and vafa advocated "designer" black holes. they turned the tables on
black  hole  formation  by  showing  how  they  could  be  systematically  constructed—in  a  theorist's
imagination—by carefully, slowly, and meticulously weaving together a precise combination of the
branes that had emerged from the second superstring revolution.

the power of this approach became immediately clear. by maintaining full theoretical control
over the microscopic construction of their black holes, strominger and vafa could easily and directly
count the number of rearrangements of the black hole's microscopic constituents that would leave its
overall observable properties, its mass and force charges, unchanged. they could then compare this
number with the area of the black hole's horizon—the entropy predicted by bekenstein and hawking.
when strominger and vafa did so, they found perfect agreement. at least for the class of extremal
black holes, they had succeeded in using string theory to account for the microscopic constituents and
the associated entropy precisely. a quarter-century-old puzzle had been solved.6

many  string  theorists  view  this  success  as  an  important  and  convincing  piece  of  evidence  in
support of the theory. our understanding of string theory is still too coarse to be able to make direct
and precise contact with experimental observations of, say, the mass of a quark or an electron. but we
now  see  that  string  theory  has  provided  the  first  fundamental  explanation  of  a  long-established
property of black holes that has stumped physicists using more conventional theories for many years.
and  this  property  of  black  holes  is  intimately  tied  up  with  hawking's  prediction  that  they  should
radiate, a prediction that, in principle, should be experimentally measurable. of course, this requires
that we definitively find a black hole in the heavens and then construct equipment sensitive enough to
detect the radiation that it emits. if the black hole were light enough, the latter step is well within the
reach of current technology. even though this experimental program has not as yet met with success, it
does re-emphasize that the chasm between string theory and definitive physical statements about the
natural  world  can  be  bridged.  even  sheldon  glashow—the  archrival  of  string  theory  through  the
1980s—has said recently, "when string theorists talk about black holes they are almost talking about
observable phenomena—and that is impressive."7

the remaining mysteries of black holes

even  with  these  impressive  developments,  there  are  still  two  central  mysteries  surrounding  black
holes. the first concerns the impact black holes have on the concept of determinism. in the beginning
of the nineteenth century the french mathematician pierre-simon de laplace enunciated the strictest
and most far-reaching consequence of the clockwork universe that followed from newton's laws of
motion:

an intelligence that, at a given instant, could comprehend all the forces by which nature is

animated and the respective situation of the beings that make it up, if moreover it were vast
enough  to  submit  these  data  to  analysis,  would  encompass  in  the  same  formula  the
movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the lightest atoms. for such
an intelligence nothing would be uncertain, and the future, like the past, would be open to
its eyes.8

in  other  words,  if  at  some  instant  you  know  the  positions  and  velocities  of  every  particle  in  the
universe, you can use newton's laws of motion to determine—at least in principle—their positions
and velocities at any other prior or future time. from this perspective, any and all occurrences, from
the  formation  of  the  sun  to  the  crucifixion  of  christ,  to  the  motion  of  your  eyes  across  this  word,
strictly follow from the precise positions and velocities of the particulate ingredients of the universe
a moment after the big bang. this rigid lock-step view of the unfolding of the universe raises all sorts
of  perplexing  philosophical  dilemmas  surrounding  the  question  of  free  will,  but  its  import  was
substantially  diminished  by  the  discovery  of  quantum  mechanics.  we  have  seen  that  heisenberg's
uncertainty  principle  undercuts  laplacian  determinism  because  we  fundamentally  cannot  know  the
precise positions and velocities of the constituents of the universe. instead, these classical properties
are replaced by quantum wave functions, which tell us only the probability that any given particle is
here or there, or that it has this or that velocity.

the downfall of laplace's vision, however, does not leave the concept of determinism in total
ruins. wave functions—the probability waves of quantum mechanics—evolve in time according to
precise  mathematical  rules,  such  as  the  schrödinger  equation  (or  its  more  precise  relativistic
counterparts,  such  as  the  dirac  equation  and  the  klein-gordon  equation).  this  informs  us  that
quantum determinism replaces laplace's classical determinism: knowledge of the wave functions of
all  of  the  fundamental  ingredients  of  the  universe  at  some  moment  in  time  allows  a  "vast  enough"
intelligence to determine the wave functions at any prior or future time. quantum determinism tells us
that  the probability  that  any  particular  event  will  occur  at  some  chosen  time  in  the  future  is  fully
determined  by  knowledge  of  the  wave  functions  at  any  prior  time.  the  probabilistic  aspect  of
quantum  mechanics  significantly  softens  laplacian  determinism  by  shifting  inevitability  from
outcomes  to  outcome-likelihoods,  but  the  latter  are  fully  determined  within  the  conventional
framework of quantum theory.

in 1976, hawking declared that even this softer form of determinism is violated by the presence
of black holes. once again, the calculations behind this declaration are formidable, but the essential
idea is fairly straightforward. when anything falls into a black hole, its wave function gets sucked in
as  well.  but  this  means  that  in  the  quest  to  work  out  wave  functions  at  all  future  times,  our  "vast
enough" intelligence will be irreparably shortchanged. to predict the future fully we need to know all
wave functions fully today. but, if some have escaped down the abyss of black holes, the information
they contain is lost.

at first sight, this complication arising from black holes may not seem worth worrying about.
since everything behind the event horizon of a black hole is cut off from the rest of the universe, can't
we  just  completely  ignore  anything  that  is  unfortunate  enough  to  have  fallen  in?  philosophically,
moreover, can't we tell ourselves that the universe has not really lost the information carried by the
stuff that has fallen into the black hole; it is simply locked within a region of space that we rational
beings choose to avoid at all costs? prior to hawking's realization that black holes are not completely
black, the answer to these questions was yes. but once hawking informed the world that black holes
radiate, the story changed. radiation carries energy and so, as a black hole radiates, its mass slowly

decreases—it slowly evaporates. as it does so, the distance from the center of the hole to the event
horizon slowly shrinks, and as this shroud recedes, regions of space that were previously cut off re-
enter the cosmic arena. now our philosophical musings must face the music: does the information
contained in the things swallowed by the black hole—the data we imagined existing within the black
hole's interior—re-emerge as the black hole evaporates? this is the information required for quantum
determinism to hold, and so this question goes to the heart of whether black holes imbue the evolution
of our universe with an even deeper element of happenstance.

as of this writing, there is no consensus among physicists regarding the answer to this question.
for many years, hawking has strongly claimed that the information does not re-emerge—that black
holes  destroy  information  thereby  "introducing  a  new  level  of  uncertainty  into  physics,  over  and
above the usual uncertainty associated with quantum theory."9  in  fact,  hawking,  together  with  kip
thorne of the california institute of technology, has a bet with john preskill, also of the california
institute of technology, regarding what happens to the information captured by a black hole: hawking
and thorne bet that the information is forever lost, while preskill has taken the opposite position and
bet that the information re-emerges as the black hole radiates and shrinks. the wager? information
itself: "the loser(s) will reward the winner(s) with an encyclopedia of the winner's choice."

the  bet  remains  unsettled,  but  hawking  has  recently  acknowledged  that  the  newfound
understanding of black holes from string theory, as discussed above, shows that there might be a way
for  the  information  to  re-emerge.10  the  new  idea  is  that  for  the  kind  of  black  holes  studied  by
strominger and vafa, and by many other physicists since their initial paper, information can be stored
and recovered from the constituent branes. this insight, strominger recently said, "has led some string
theorists  to  want  to  claim  victory—to  claim  that  the  information  is  recovered  as  black  holes
evaporate. in my opinion this conclusion is premature; there is still much work to be done in order to
see if this is true."11 vafa concurs, saying that he "is agnostic on this question—it could still turn out
either way."12 answering this question is a central goal of current research. as hawking has put it,

most physicists want to believe that information is not lost, as this would make the world
safe and predictable. but i believe that if one takes einstein's general relativity seriously,
one must allow for the possibility that spacetime ties itself in knots and that information
gets lost in the folds. determining whether or not information actually does get lost is one
of the major questions in theoretical physics today.13

the second unresolved black hole mystery concerns the nature of spacetime at the central point
of  the  hole.14  a  straightforward  application  of  general  relativity,  going  all  the  way  back  to
schwarzschild in 1916, shows that the enormous mass and energy crushed together at the black hole's
center causes the fabric of spacetime to suffer a devastating rift, to be radically warped into a state of
infinite curvature—to be punctured by a spacetime singularity. one conclusion that physicists drew
from this is that since all of the matter that has crossed the event horizon is inexorably drawn to the
center of the black hole, and since once there the matter has no future, time itself comes to an end at
the heart of a black hole. other physicists, who over the years have explored the properties of the
black hole's core using einstein's equations, revealed the wild possibility that it might be a gateway
to another universe that tenuously attaches to ours only at a black hole's center. roughly speaking,
where time in our universe comes to an end, time in the attached universe just begins.

we will take up some of the implications of this mind-boggling possibility in the next chapter,

but for now we want to stress one important point. we must recall the central lesson: extremes of
huge mass and small size leading to unimaginably large density invalidate the sole use of einstein's
classical theory and require that quantum mechanics be brought to bear as well. this leads us to ask,
what does string theory have to say about the spacetime singularity at the center of a black hole? this
is a topic of intense current research, but as with the question of information loss, it has not yet been
settled. string theory deftly deals with a variety of other singularities—the rips and tears in space
discussed in chapter 11 and in the first part of this chapter. 15 but if you have seen one singularity you
have not  seen  them  all.  the  fabric  of  our  universe  can  be  ripped,  punctured,  and  torn  in  many
different  ways.  string  theory  has  given  us  profound  insights  into  some  of  these  singularities,  but
others,  the  black  hole  singularity  among  them,  have  so  far  eluded  the  string  theorists'  reach.  the
essential  reason  for  this,  once  again,  is  the  reliance  on  perturbative  tools  in  string  theory  whose
approximations, in this case, cloud our ability to analyze reliably and fully what happens at the deep
interior point of a black hole.

however, given the recent tremendous progress in nonperturbative methods and their successful
application  to  other  aspects  of  black  holes,  string  theorists  have  high  hopes  that  it  won't  be  long
before the mysteries residing at the center of black holes start to unravel.

chapter 14

reflections on cosmology

humans  throughout  history  have  had  a  passionate  drive  to  understand  the  origin  of  the  universe.
there is, perhaps, no single question that so transcends cultural and temporal divides, inspiring the
imagination of our ancient forebears as well as the research of the modern cosmologist. at a deep
level, there is a collective longing for an explanation of why there is a universe, how it has come to
take  the  form  we  witness,  and  for  the  rationale—the  principle—that  drives  its  evolution.  the
astounding  thing  is  that  humanity  has  now  come  to  a  point  where  a  framework  is  emerging  for
answering some of these questions scientifically.

the currently accepted scientific theory of creation declares that the universe experienced the
most  extreme  of  conditions—enormous  energy,  temperature,  and  density—during  its  earliest
moments. these conditions, as is by now familiar, require that both quantum mechanics and gravity be
taken into account, and hence the birth of the universe provides a profound arena for exercising the
insights  of  superstring  theory.  we  will  discuss  these  nascent  insights  shortly,  but  first,  we  briefly
recount the pre–string theory cosmological story, which is often referred to as the standard model of
cosmology.

the standard model of cosmology

the modern theory of cosmic origins dates from the decade and a half after einstein's completion of
general relativity. although einstein refused to take his own theory at face value and accept that it
implies that the universe is neither eternal nor static, alexander friedmann did. and as we discussed
in chapter 3, friedmann found what is now known as the big bang solution to einstein's equations—a
solution that declares that the universe violently emerged from a state of infinite compression, and is
currently  in  the  expanding  aftermath  of  that  primeval  explosion.  so  certain  was  einstein  that  such
time-varying solutions were not a result of his theory that he published a short article claiming to have
found a fatal flaw in friedmann's work. some eight months later, however, friedmann succeeded in
convincing  einstein  that  there  was,  in  fact,  no  flaw;  einstein  publicly  but  curtly  retracted  his
objection. nevertheless, it is clear that einstein did not think friedmann's results had any relevance to
the universe. but about five years later, hubble's detailed observations of a few dozen galaxies with
the  hundred-inch  telescope  at  mount  wilson  observatory  confirmed  that,  indeed,  the  universe  is
expanding. friedmann's work, refashioned in a more systematic and efficient form by the physicists
howard robertson and arthur walker, still forms the foundation of modern cosmology.

in a little more detail, the modern theory of cosmic origins goes like this. some 15 billion or so
years ago, the universe erupted from an enormously energetic, singular event, which spewed forth all
of space and all of matter. (you don't have to search far to locate where the big bang occurred, for it
took place where you are now as well as everywhere else; in the beginning, all locations we now see

as separate were the same location.) the temperature of the universe a mere 10-43 seconds after the
bang,  the  so-called planck  time,  is  calculated  to  have  been  about  1032  kelvin,  some  10  trillion
trillion  times  hotter  than  the  deep  interior  of  the  sun. as  time  passed,  the  universe  expanded  and
cooled, and as it did, the initial homogeneous, roiling hot, primordial cosmic plasma began to form
eddies  and  clumps. at  about  a  hundred-thousandth  of  a  second  after  the  bang,  things  had  cooled
sufficiently  (to  about  10  trillion  kelvin—about  a  million  times  hotter  than  the  sun's  interior)  for
quarks to clump together in groups of three, forming protons and neutrons. about a hundredth of a
second later, conditions were right for the nuclei of some of the lightest elements in the periodic table
to start congealing out of the cooling plasma of particles. for the next three minutes, as the simmering
universe  cooled  to  about  a  billion  degrees,  the  predominant  nuclei  that  emerged  were  those  of
hydrogen and helium, along with trace amounts of deuterium ("heavy" hydrogen) and lithium. this is
known as the period of primordial nucleosynthesis.

not a whole lot happened for the next few hundred thousand years, other than further expansion
and cooling. but then, when the temperature had dropped to a few thousand degrees, wildly streaming
electrons slowed down to the point where atomic nuclei, mostly hydrogen and helium, could capture
them, forming the first electrically neutral atoms. this was a pivotal moment: from this point forward
the universe, by and large, became transparent. prior to the era of electron capture, the universe was
filled with a dense plasma of electrically charged particles—some with positive charges like nuclei
and  others  with  negative  charges,  like  electrons.  photons,  which  interact  only  with  electrically
charged  objects,  were  bumped  and  jostled  incessantly  by  the  thick  bath  of  charged  particles,
traversing hardly any distance before being deflected or absorbed. the charged-particle barrier to the
free motion of photons would have made the universe appear almost completely opaque, much like
what you may have experienced in a dense morning fog or a blinding, gusty snowstorm. but when
negatively  charged  electrons  were  brought  into  orbit  around  positively  charged  nuclei,  yielding
electrically neutral atoms, the charged obstructions disappeared and the dense fog lifted. from that
time onward, photons from the big bang have traveled unhindered and the full expanse of the universe
gradually came into view.

about a billion years later, with the universe having substantially calmed down from its frenetic
beginnings, galaxies, stars, and ultimately planets began to emerge as gravitationally bound clumps of
the primordial elements. today, some 15 billion or so years after the bang, we can marvel at both the
magnificence of the cosmos and at our collective ability to have pieced together a reasonable and
experimentally testable theory of cosmic origin.

but how much faith should we really have in the big bang theory?

putting the big bang to the test

by looking out into the universe with their most powerful telescopes, astronomers can see light that
was emitted from galaxies and quasars just a few billion years after the big bang. this allows them to
verify the expansion of the universe predicted by the big bang theory back to this early phase of the
universe, and everything checks out to a "t." to test the theory to yet earlier times, physicists and
astronomers must make use of more indirect methods. one of the most refined approaches involves
something known as cosmic background radiation.

if you've ever felt a bicycle tire after vigorously pumping it full of air, you know that it is warm
to  the  touch.  some  of  the  energy  you  expend  in  the  repeated  pumping  motion  is  transferred  to  an

increase in temperature of the air in the tire. this reflects a general principle: under a wide variety of
conditions, when things are compressed they heat up. reasoning in reverse, when things are allowed
to  decompress—to  expand—they  cool  down.  air  conditioners  and  refrigerators  rely  on  these
principles, subjecting substances like freon to repeated cycles of compression and expansion (as well
as  evaporation  and  condensation)  to  cause  heat  flow  in  the  desired  direction. although  these  are
simple facts of terrestrial physics, it turns out that they have a profound incarnation in the cosmos as a
whole.

we saw above that after electrons and nuclei join together to form atoms, photons are free to
travel  unimpeded  throughout  the  universe.  this  means  that  the  universe  is  filled  with  a  "gas"  of
photons  traveling  this  way  and  that,  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  cosmos. as  the  universe
expands, this gas of freely streaming photons expands as well since, in essence, the universe is its
container. and  just  as  the  temperature  of  a  more  conventional  gas  (like  the  air  in  a  bicycle  tire)
decreases as it expands, the temperature of this photon gas decreases as the universe expands. in fact,
physicists as far back as george gamow and his students ralph alpher and robert hermann in the
1950s, and robert dicke and jim peebles in the mid-1960s, realized that the present-day universe
should be permeated by an almost uniform bath of these primordial photons, which, through the last
15 billion years of cosmic expansion, have cooled to a mere handful of degrees above absolute zero.1
in 1965, arno penzias and robert wilson of bell laboratories in new jersey accidentally made one
of the most important discoveries of our age when they detected this afterglow of the big bang while
working  on  an  antenna  intended  for  use  with  communication  satellites.  subsequent  research  has
refined both theory and experiment, culminating in measurements taken by nasa's cobe (cosmic
background explorer) satellite in the early 1990s. with these data, physicists and astronomers have
confirmed  to  high  precision  that  the  universe is filled with microwave radiation (if our eyes were
sensitive to microwaves, we would see a diffuse glow in the world around us) whose temperature is
about 2.7 degrees above absolute zero, exactly in keeping with the expectation of the big bang theory.
in  concrete  terms,  in every cubic meter of the universe—including the one you now occupy—there
are,  on  average,  about  400  million  photons  that  collectively  compose  the  vast  cosmic  sea  of
microwave  radiation,  an  echo  of  creation. a  percentage  of  the  "snow"  you  see  on  your  television
screen  when  you  disconnect  the  cable  feed  and  tune  to  a  station  that  has  ceased  its  scheduled
broadcasts is due to this dim aftermath of the big bang. this match between theory and experiment
confirms the big bang picture of cosmology as far back as the time that photons first moved freely
through the universe, about a few hundred thousand years after the bang (atb).

can we push further in our tests of the big bang theory to even earlier times? we can. by using
standard principles of nuclear theory and thermodynamics, physicists can make definite predictions
about  the  relative  abundance  of  the  light  elements  produced  during  the  period  of  primordial
nucleosynthesis, between a hundredth of a second and a few minutes atb. according to theory, for
example, about 23 percent of the universe should be composed of helium. by measuring the helium
abundance  in  stars  and  nebulae,  astronomers  have  amassed  impressive  support  that,  indeed,  this
prediction  is  right  on  the  mark.  perhaps  even  more  impressive  is  the  prediction  and  confirmation
regarding deuterium abundance, since there is essentially no astrophysical process, other than the big
bang, that can account for its small but definite presence throughout the cosmos. the confirmation of
these abundances, and more recently that of lithium, is a sensitive test of our understanding of early
universe physics back to the time of their primordial synthesis.

this is impressive almost to the point of hubris. all the data we possess confirm a theory of
cosmology capable of describing the universe from about a hundredth of a second atb to the present,

some  15  billion  years  later.  nevertheless,  one  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  newborn
universe evolved with phenomenal haste. tiny fractions of a second—fractions much smaller than a
hundredth of a second—form cosmic epochs during which long-lasting features of the world were
first imprinted. and so, physicists have continued to push onward, trying to explain the universe at
ever  earlier  times.  since  the  universe  gets  ever  smaller,  hotter,  and  denser  as  we  push  back,  an
accurate quantum-mechanical description of matter and the forces becomes increasingly important. as
we have seen from other viewpoints in earlier chapters, point-particle quantum field theory works
until typical particle energies are around the planck energy. in a cosmological context, this occurred
when the whole of the known universe fit within a planck-sized nugget, yielding a density so great that
it strains one's ability to find a fitting metaphor or an enlightening analogy: the density of the universe
at  the  planck  time  was  simply colossal.  at  such  energies  and  densities  gravity  and  quantum
mechanics can no longer be treated as two separate entities as they are in point-particle quantum field
theory. instead, the central message of this book is that at and beyond these enormous energies we
must  invoke  string  theory.  in  temporal  terms,  we  encounter  these  energies  and  densities  when  we
probe  earlier  than  the  planck  time  of  10-43  seconds  atb,  and  hence  this  earliest  epoch  is  the
cosmological arena of string theory.

let's head toward this era by first seeing what the standard cosmological theory tells us about

the universe before a hundredth of a second atb, but after the planck time.

from the planck time to a hundredth of a second atb

recall from chapter 7 (especially figure 7.1) that the three nongravitational forces appear to merge
together  in  the  intensely  hot  environment  of  the  early  universe.  physicists'  calculations  of  how  the
strengths  of  these  forces  vary  with  energy  and  temperature  show  that  prior  to  about  10-35  seconds
atb, the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces were all one "grand unified" or "super" force. in
this  state  the  universe  was  far  more  symmetric  than  it  is  today.  like  the  homogeneity  that  follows
when a collection of disparate metals is heated to a smooth molten liquid, the significant differences
between  the  forces  as  we  now  observe  them  were  all  erased  by  the  extremes  of  energy  and
temperature encountered in the very early universe. but as time went by and the universe expanded
and cooled, the formalism of quantum field theory shows that this symmetry would have been sharply
reduced through a number of rather abrupt steps, ultimately leading to the comparatively asymmetric
form with which we are familiar.

it's not hard to understand the physics behind such reduction of symmetry, or symmetry breaking,
as it is more precisely called. picture a large container filled with water. the molecules of h2o are
uniformly spread throughout the container and regardless of the angle from which you view it, the
water  looks  the  same.  now  watch  the  container  as  you  lower  the  temperature. at  first  not  much
happens. on microscopic scales, the average speed of the water molecules decreases, but that's about
all.  when  you  decrease  the  temperature  to  0  degrees  celsius,  however,  you  suddenly  see  that
something drastic occurs. the liquid water begins to freeze and turn into solid ice. as discussed in
the preceding chapter, this is a simple example of a phase transition. for our present purpose, the
important thing to note is that the phase transition results in a decrease in the amount of symmetry
displayed by the h2o molecules. whereas liquid water looks the same regardless of the angle from
which  it  is  viewed—it  appears  to  be  rotationally  symmetric—solid  ice  is  different.  it  has  a
crystalline block structure, which means that if you examine it with adequate precision, it will, like

any crystal, look different from different angles. the phase transition has resulted in a decrease in the
amount of rotational symmetry that is manifest.

although we have discussed only one familiar example, the point is true more generally: as we
lower the temperature of many physical systems, at some point they undergo a phase transition that
typically results in a decrease or a "breaking" of some of their previous symmetries. in fact, a system
can go through a series of phase transitions if its temperature is varied over a wide enough range.
water, again, provides a simple example. if we start with h2o above 100 degrees celsius, it is a gas:
steam.  in  this  form,  the  system  has  even  more  symmetry  than  in  the  liquid  phase  since  now  the
individual  h2o  molecules  have  been  liberated  from  their  congested,  stuck-together  liquid  form.
instead, they all zip around the container on completely equal footing, without forming any clumps or
"cliques" in which groups of molecules single each other out for a close association at the expense of
others.  molecular  democracy  prevails  at  high  enough  temperatures. as  we  lower  the  temperature
below  100  degrees,  of  course,  water  droplets  do  form  as  we  pass  through  a  gas-liquid  phase
transition, and the symmetry is reduced. continuing on to yet lower temperatures, nothing too dramatic
happens until we pass through 0 degrees celsius, when, as above, the liquid-water/solid-ice phase
transition results in another abrupt decrease in symmetry.

physicists believe that between the planck time and a hundredth of a second atb, the universe
behaved  in  a  very  similar  way,  passing  through  at  least  two  analogous  phase  transitions.  at
temperatures above 1028 kelvin, the three nongravitational forces appeared as one, as symmetric as
they could possibly be. (at the end of this chapter we will discuss string theory's inclusion of the
gravitational  force  into  this  high-temperature  merger.)  but  as  the  temperature  dropped  below  1028
kelvin, the universe underwent a phase transition in which the three forces crystallized out from their
common union in different ways. their relative strengths and the details of how they act on matter
began to diverge. and so, the symmetry among the forces evident at higher temperatures was broken
as the universe cooled. nevertheless, the work of glashow, salam, and weinberg (see chapter 5)
shows  that  not  all  of  the  high-temperature  symmetry  was  erased:  the  weak  and  electromagnetic
forces  were  still  deeply  interwoven. as  the  universe  further  expanded  and  cooled,  nothing  much
happened  until  things  simmered  down  to  1015  kelvin—about  100  million  times  the  sun's  core
temperature—when 
the
electromagnetic and weak forces. at this temperature, they too crystallized out from their previous,
more symmetric union, and as the universe continued to cool, their differences became magnified. the
two phase transitions are responsible for the three apparently distinct nongravitational forces at work
in  the  world,  even  though  this  review  of  cosmic  history  shows  that  the  forces,  in  fact,  are  deeply
related.

through  another  phase 

the  universe  went 

transition 

that  affected 

a cosmological puzzle

this  post–planck  era  cosmology  provides  an  elegant,  consistent,  and  calculationally  tractable
framework for understanding the universe as far back as the briefest moments after the bang. but, as
with most successful theories, our new insights raise yet more detailed questions. and it turns out that
some of these questions, while not invalidating the standard cosmological scenario as presented, do
highlight awkward aspects that point toward the need for a deeper theory. let's focus on one. it is
called the horizon problem, and it is one of the most important issues in modern cosmology.

detailed  studies  of  the  cosmic  background  radiation  have  shown  that  regardless  of  which
direction in the sky one points the measuring antenna, the temperature of the radiation is the same, to
about one part in 100,000. if you think about it for a moment, you will realize that this is quite strange.
why should different locations in the universe, separated by enormous distances, have temperatures
that  are  so  finely  matched? a  seemingly  natural  resolution  to  this  puzzle  is  to  note  that,  yes,  two
diametrically opposite places in the heavens are far apart today, but like twins separated at birth,
during the earliest moments of the universe they (and everything else) were very close together. since
they emerged from a common starting point, you might suggest that it's not at all surprising that they
share common physical traits such as their temperature.

in  the  standard  big  bang  cosmology  this  suggestion  fails.  here's  why.  a  bowl  of  hot  soup
gradually cools to room temperature because it is in contact with the colder surrounding air. if you
wait long enough, the temperature of the soup and the air will, through their mutual contact, become
the same. but if the soup is in a thermos, of course, it retains its heat for much longer, since there is
far  less  communication  with  the  outside  environment.  this  reflects  that  the  homogenization  of
temperature between two bodies relies on their having prolonged and unimpaired communication. to
test the suggestion that positions in space that are currently separated by vast distances share the same
temperature because of their initial contact, we must therefore examine the efficacy of information
exchange between them in the early universe. at first you might think that since the positions were
closer together at earlier times, communication was ever easier. but spatial proximity is only one part
of the story. the other part is temporal duration.

to  examine  this  more  fully,  let's  imagine  studying  a  "film"  of  the  cosmic  expansion,  but  let's
review it in reverse, running the film backward in time from today toward the moment of the big bang.
since the speed of light sets a limit to how fast any signal or information of any kind can travel, matter
in two regions of space can exchange heat energy and thereby have a chance of coming to a common
temperature only if the distance between them at a given moment is less than the distance light can
have traveled since the time of the big bang. and so, as we roll the film backward in time we see that
there is a competition between how close together our spatial regions become versus how far back
we have to turn the clock for them to get there. for instance, if in order for the separation of our two
spatial locations to be 186,000 miles, we have to run the film back to less than a second atb, then
even though they are much closer, there is still no way for them to have any influence on each other
since light would require a whole second to travel the distance between them.2 if in order for their
separation to be much less, say 186 miles, we have to run the film back to less than a thousandth of a
second atb, then, again, the same conclusion follows: they can't influence each other since in less
than a thousandth of a second light can't travel the 186 miles separating them. carrying on in the same
vein,  if  we  have  to  run  the  film  back  to  less  than  a  billionth  of  a  second atb  in  order  for  these
regions to be within one foot of each other, they still cannot influence each other since there is just not
enough time since the bang for light to have traveled the 12 inches between them. this shows that just
because  two  points  in  the  universe  get  closer  and  closer  as  we  head  back  to  the  bang,  it  is  not
necessarily  the  case  that  they  can  have  had  the  thermal  contact—like  that  between  soup  and  air—
necessary to bring them to the same temperature.

physicists  have  shown  that  precisely  this  problem  arises  in  the  standard  big  bang  model.
detailed  calculations  show  that  there  is  no  way  for  regions  of  space  that  are  currently  widely
separated  to  have  had  the  exchange  of  heat  energy  that  would  explain  their  having  the  same
temperature. as the word horizon refers to how far we can see—how far light can travel, so to speak
—physicists call the unexplained uniformity of temperature throughout the vast expanse of the cosmos

the "horizon problem." the puzzle does not mean the standard cosmological theory is wrong. but the
uniformity  of  temperature  does  strongly  suggest  that  we  are  missing  an  important  part  of  the
cosmological  story.  in  1979,  the  physicist  alan  guth,  now  of  the  massachusetts  institute  of
technology, wrote the missing chapter.

inflation

the root of the horizon problem is that in order to get two widely separated regions of the universe
close together, we have to run the cosmic film way back toward the beginning of time. so far back, in
fact, that there is not enough time for any physical influence to have traveled from one region to the
other. the difficulty, therefore, is that as we run the cosmological film backward and approach the
big bang, the universe does not shrink at a fast enough rate.

well,  that's  the  rough  idea,  but  it's  worthwhile  sharpening  the  description  a  bit.  the  horizon
problem stems from the fact that like a ball tossed upward, the dragging pull of gravity causes the
expansion rate of the universe to slow down. this means that, for example, to halve the separation
between  two  locations  in  the  cosmos  we  must  run  the  film  back  more  than  halfway  toward  its
beginning. in turn, we see that to halve the separation we must more than halve the time since the big
bang. less time since the bang—proportionally speaking—means it is harder for the two regions to
communicate, even though they get closer.

guth's resolution of the horizon problem is now simple to state. he found another solution to
einstein's  equations  in  which  the  very  early  universe  undergoes  a  brief  period  of  enormously  fast
expansion—a period during which it "inflates" in size at an unheralded exponential expansion rate.
unlike  the  case  of  a  ball  that  slows  down  after  being  tossed  upward,  exponential  expansion  gets
faster as it proceeds. when we run the cosmic film in reverse, rapid accelerating expansion turns into
rapid decelerating contraction. this means that to halve the separation between two locations in the
cosmos (during the exponential epoch) we need run the the film back less than halfway—much less, in
fact. running the film back less implies that the two regions will have had more time to communicate
thermally and, like hot soup and air, they will have had ample time to come to the same temperature.

through  guth's  discovery  and  later  important  refinements  made  by  andrei  linde,  now  of
stanford university, paul steinhardt and andreas albrecht, then of the university of pennsylvania,
and many others, the standard cosmological model was revamped into the inflationary cosmological
model. in this framework, the standard cosmological model is modified during a tiny window of time
—around 10-36 to 10-34  seconds atb—in  which  the  universe  expanded  by  a  colossal  factor  of  at
least 1030, compared with a factor of about a hundred during the same time interval in the standard
scenario. this means that in a brief flicker of time, about a trillionth of a trillionth of a trillionth of a
second atb, the size of the universe increased by a greater percentage than it has in the 15 billion
years since. before this expansion, matter that is now in far-flung regions of the cosmos was much
closer  together  than  in  the  standard  cosmological  model,  making  it  possible  for  a  common
temperature to be easily established. then, through guth's momentary burst of cosmological inflation
—followed by the more usual expansion of the standard cosmological model—these regions of space
were  able  to  become  separated  by  the  vast  distances  we  witness  currently. and  so,  the  brief  but
profound inflationary modification of the standard cosmological model solves the horizon problem
(as  well  as  a  number  of  other  important  problems  we  have  not  discussed)  and  has  gained  wide
acceptance among cosmologists.3

we summarize the history of the universe from just after the planck time to the present, according

to the current theory, in figure 14.1.

figure 14.1 a time line denoting a few key moments in the history of the universe.

cosmology and superstring theory

there remains a sliver of figure 14.1, between the big bang and the planck time, that we have not yet
discussed. by blindly applying the equations of general relativity to that region, physicists have found
that the universe continues to get ever smaller, ever hotter, and ever denser, as we move backward in
time toward the bang. at time zero, as the size of the universe vanishes, the temperature and density
soar to infinity, giving us the most extreme signal that this theoretical model of the universe, firmly
rooted in the classical gravitational framework of general relativity, has completely broken down.

nature is telling us emphatically that under such conditions we must merge general relativity and
quantum mechanics—in other words, we must make use of string theory. currently, research on the
implications of string theory for cosmology is at an early stage of development. perturbative methods
can,  at  best,  give  skeletal  insights,  since  the  extremes  of  energy,  temperature,  and  density  require
precision  analysis. although  the  second  superstring  revolution  has  provided  some  nonperturbative
techniques,  it  will  be  some  time  before  they  are  honed  for  the  kinds  of  calculations  required  in  a
cosmological setting. nevertheless, as we now discuss, during the last decade or so, physicists have
taken the first steps toward understanding string cosmology. here is what they have found.

it  appears  that  there  are  three  essential  ways  in  which  string  theory  modifies  the  standard
cosmological model. first, in a manner that current research continues to clarify, string theory implies
that the universe has what amounts to a smallest possible size. this has profound consequences for
our understanding of the universe at the moment of the bang itself, when the standard theory claims
that  its  size  has  shrunk  all  the  way  to  zero.  second,  string  theory  has  a  small-radius/large-radius
duality (intimately related to its having a smallest possible size), which also has deep cosmological
significance,  as  we  will  see  in  a  moment.  finally,  string  theory  has  more  than  four  spacetime
dimensions,  and  from  a  cosmological  standpoint,  we  must  address  the  evolution  of  them  all.  let's
discuss these points in greater detail.

in the beginning there was a planck-sized nugget

in the late 1980s, robert brandenberger and cumrun vafa made the first important strides toward
understanding how the application of these string theoretic features modifies the conclusions of the
standard  cosmological  framework.  they  came  to  two  important  realizations.  first,  as  we  run  the
clock backward in time toward the beginning, the temperature continues to rise until the size of the
universe is about the planck length in all directions. but then, the temperature hits a maximum  and
begins to decrease. the intuitive reason behind this is not hard to come by. imagine for simplicity (as
brandenberger and vafa did) that all of the space dimensions of the universe are circular. as we run
the clock backward and the radius of each of these circles shrinks, the temperature of the universe
increases. but as each of the radii collapses toward and then through the planck length, we know that,
within string theory, this is physically identical to the radii shrinking to the planck length and then
bouncing  back  toward  increasing  size.  since  temperature  goes  down  as  the  universe  expands,  we
would  expect  that  the  futile  attempt  to  squeeze  the  universe  to  sub-planck  size  means  that  the
temperature stops rising, hits a maximum, and then begins to decrease. through detailed calculations,
brandenberger and vafa explicitly verified that indeed this is the case.

this led brandenberger and vafa to the following cosmological picture. in the beginning, all of
the spatial dimensions of string theory are tightly curled up to their smallest possible extent, which is
roughly the planck length. the temperature and energy are high, but not infinite, since string theory has
avoided  the  conundrums  of  an  infinitely  compressed  zero-size  starting  point.  at  this  beginning
moment of the universe, all the spatial dimensions of string theory are on completely equal footing—
they  are  completely  symmetric—all  curled  up  into  a  multidimensional,  planck-sized  nugget.  then,
according to brandenberger and vafa, the universe goes through its first stage of symmetry reduction
when, at about the planck time, three of the spatial dimensions are singled out for expansion, while all
others  retain  their  initial  planck-scale  size.  these  three  space  dimensions  are  then  identified  with
those in the inflationary cosmological scenario, the post-planck-time evolution summarized in figure
14.1 takes over, and these three dimensions expand to their currently observed form.

why three?

an immediate question is, what drives the symmetry reduction that singles out precisely three spatial
dimensions  for  expansion?  that  is,  beyond  the  experimental  fact  that  only  three  of  the  space
dimensions have expanded to observably large size, does string theory provide a fundamental reason
for why some other number (four, five, six, and so on) or, even more symmetrically, all of the space
dimensions  don't  expand  as  well?  brandenberger  and  vafa  came  up  with  a  possible  explanation.
remember that the small-radius/large-radius duality of string theory rests upon the fact that when a
dimension is curled up like a circle, a string can wrap around it. brandenberger and vafa realized
that,  like  rubber  bands  wrapped  around  a  bicycle  tire  inner  tube,  such  wrapped  strings  tend  to
constrict the dimensions they encircle, keeping them from expanding. at first sight, this would seem to
mean that each of the dimensions will be constricted, since the strings can and do wrap them all. the
loophole  is  that  if  a  wrapped  string  and  its  antistring  partner  (roughly,  a  string  that  wraps  the
dimension in the opposite direction) should come into contact, they will swiftly annihilate one other,
producing  an unwrapped  string.  if  these  processes  happen  with  sufficient  rapidity  and  efficiency,
enough of the rubber band–like constriction will be eliminated, allowing the dimensions to expand.
brandenberger and vafa suggested that this reduction in the choking effect of wrapped strings will
happen in only three of the spatial dimensions. here's why.

imagine two point particles rolling along a one-dimensional line such as the spatial extent of
lineland. unless they happen to have identical velocities, sooner or later one will overtake the other,
and they will collide. notice, however, that if these same point particles are randomly rolling around
on  a  two-dimensional  plane  such  as  the  spatial  extent  of  flatland,  it  is  likely  that  they  will  never
collide. the second spatial dimension opens up a new world of trajectories for each particle, most of
which do not cross each other at the same point at the same time. in three, four, or any higher number
of dimensions, it gets increasingly unlikely that the two particles will ever meet. brandenberger and
vafa realized that an analogous idea holds if we replace point particles with loops of string, wrapped
around  spatial  dimensions.  although  it's  significantly  harder  to  see,  if  there  are three  (or  fewer)
circular spatial dimensions, two wrapped strings will likely collide with one another—the analog of
what  happens  for  two  particles  moving  in  one  dimension.  but  in  four  or  more  space  dimensions,
wrapped  strings  are  less  and  less  likely  ever  to  collide—the  analog  of  what  happens  for  point
particles in two or more dimensions.4

this leads to the following picture. in the first moment of the universe, the tumult from the high,
but finite, temperature drives all of the circular dimensions to try to expand. as they do, the wrapped
strings constrict the expansion, driving the dimensions back to their original planck-size radii. but,
sooner or later a random thermal fluctuation will drive three dimensions momentarily to grow larger
than the others, and our discussion then shows that strings which wrap these dimensions are highly
likely  to  collide.  about  half  of  the  collisions  will  involve  string/antistring  pairs,  leading  to
annihilations that continually lessen the constriction, allowing these three dimensions to continue to
expand. the more they expand, the less likely it is for other strings to get entangled around them since
it takes more energy for a string to wrap around a larger dimension. thus, the expansion feeds on
itself, becoming ever less constricted as the dimensions get ever larger. we can now imagine that
these three spatial dimensions continue to evolve in the manner described in the previous sections,
and expand to a size as large as or larger than the currently observable universe.

cosmology and calabi-yau shapes

for simplicity, brandenberger and vafa imagined that all of the spatial dimensions are circular. in
fact, as noted in chapter 8, so long as the circular dimensions are large enough that they curve back
on  themselves  only  beyond  the  range  of  our  current  observational  capacity,  a  circular  shape  is
consistent with the universe we observe. but for dimensions that stay small, a more realistic scenario
is one in which they are curled up into a more intricate calabi-yau space. of course, the key question
is,  which  calabi-yau  space?  how  is  this  particular  space  determined?  no  one  has  been  able  to
answer  this  question.  but  by  combining  the  drastic  topology-changing  results  described  in  the
preceding  chapter  with  these  cosmological  insights,  we  can  suggest  a  framework  for  doing  so.
through the space-tearing conifold transitions, we now know that any calabi-yau shape can evolve
into any other. so, we can imagine that in the tumultuous, hot moments after the bang, the curled-up
calabi-yau component of space stays small, but goes through a frenetic dance in which its fabric rips
apart  and  reconnects  over  and  over  again,  rapidly  taking  us  through  a  long  sequence  of  different
calabi-yau shapes. as the universe cools and three of the spatial dimensions get large, the transitions
from  one  calabi-yau  to  another  slow  down,  with  the  extra  dimensions  ultimately  settling  into  a
calabi-yau  shape  that,  optimistically,  gives  rise  to  the  physical  features  we  observe  in  the  world
around us. the challenge facing physicists is to understand, in detail, the evolution of the calabi-yau

component of space so that its present form can be predicted from theoretical principles. with the
newfound  ability  of  one  calabi-yau  to  change  smoothly  into  another,  we  see  that  the  issue  of
selecting one calabi-yau shape from the many may in fact be reduced to a problem of cosmology.5

before the beginning?

lacking the exact equations of string theory, brandenberger and vafa were forced to make numerous
approximations and assumptions in their cosmological studies. as vafa recently said,

our  work  highlights  the  new  way  in  which  string  theory  allows  us  to  start  addressing
persistent problems in the standard approach to cosmology. we see, for example, that the
whole  notion  of  an  initial  singularity  may  be  completely  avoided  by  string  theory.  but,
because  of  difficulties  in  performing  fully  trustworthy  calculations  in  such  extreme
situations with our present understanding of string theory, our work only provides a first
look into string cosmology, and is very far from the final word.6

since  their  work,  physicists  have  made  steady  progress  in  furthering  the  understanding  of  string
cosmology,  spearheaded  by,  among  others,  gabriele  veneziano  and  his  collaborator  maurizio
gasperini  of  the  university  of  torino.  gasperini  and  veneziano  have  come  up  with  their  own
intriguing version of string cosmology that shares certain features with the scenario described above,
but also differs in significant ways. as in the brandenberger and vafa work, they too rely on string
theory's  having  a  minimal  length  in  order  to  avoid  the  infinite  temperature  and  energy  density  that
arises  in  the  standard  and  inflationary  cosmological  theories.  but  rather  than  concluding  that  this
means the universe begins as an extremely hot planck-size nugget, gasperini and veneziano suggest
that there may be a whole prehistory to the universe—starting long before what we have so far been
calling time zero—that leads up to the planckian cosmic embryo.

in this so-called pre–big bang scenario, the universe began in a vastly different state than it does
in  the  big  bang  framework.  gasperini  and  veneziano's  work  suggests  that  rather  than  being
enormously  hot  and  tightly  curled  into  a  tiny  spatial  speck,  the  universe  started  out  as  cold  and
essentially infinite in spatial extent. the equations of string theory then indicate that—somewhat as in
guth's inflationary epoch—an instability kicked in, driving every point in the universe to rush rapidly
away from every other. gasperini and veneziano show that this caused space to become increasingly
curved  and  results  in  a  dramatic  increase  in  temperature  and  energy  density.7 after  some  time,  a
millimeter-sized three-dimensional region within this vast expanse could look just like the super-hot
and dense patch emerging from guth's inflationary expansion. then, through the standard expansion of
ordinary big bang cosmology, this patch can account for the whole of the universe with which we are
familiar. moreover, because the pre–big bang epoch involves its own inflationary expansion, guth's
solution to the horizon problem is automatically built into the pre–big bang cosmological scenario. as
veneziano has said, "string theory offers us a version of inflationary cosmology on a silver platter."8
the study of superstring cosmology is rapidly becoming an active and fertile arena of research.
the pre–big bang scenario, for example, has already generated a significant amount of heated, yet
fruitful debate, and it is far from clear what role it will have in the cosmological framework that will
ultimately  emerge  from  string  theory.  achieving  these  cosmological  insights  will,  no  doubt,  rely
heavily  on  the  ability  of  physicists  to  come  to  grips  with  all  aspects  of  the  second  superstring

revolution.  what,  for  example,  are  the  cosmological  consequences  of  the  existence  of  fundamental
higher-dimensional branes? how do the cosmological properties we have discussed change if string
theory happens to have a coupling constant whose value places us more toward the center of figure
12.11 rather than in one of the peninsular regions? that is, what is the impact of full-fledged m-theory
on the earliest moments of the universe? these central questions are now being studied vigorously.
already, one important insight has emerged.

m-theory and the merging of all forces

in  figure  7.1  we  showed  how  the  strengths  of  the  three  nongravitational  couplings  merge  together
when the temperature of the universe is high enough. how does the strength of the gravitational force
fit into this picture? before the emergence of m-theory, string theorists were able to show that with
the simplest of choices for the calabi-yau component of space, the gravitational force almost, but not
quite, merges with the other three, as shown in figure 14.2. string theorists found that the mismatch
could be avoided by carefully molding the shape of the chosen calabi-yau, among other tricks of the
trade,  but  such  after-the-fact  fine  tuning  always  makes  a  physicist  uncomfortable.  since  no  one
currently knows how to predict the precise form of the calabi-yau dimensions, it seems dangerous to
rely upon solutions to problems that hinge so delicately on the fine details of their shape.

figure 14.2 within m-theory, the strengths of all four forces can naturally merge.

witten has shown, however, that the second superstring revolution provides a far more robust
solution. by investigating how the strengths of the forces vary when the string coupling constant is not
necessarily small, witten found that the gravitational force curve can be gently nudged to merge with
the other forces, as in figure 14.2, without any special molding of the calabi-yau portion of space.
although it is far too early to tell, this may indicate that cosmological unity is more easily achieved
by making use of the larger framework of m-theory.

the  developments  discussed  in  this  and  the  previous  sections  represent  the  first,  somewhat
tentative  steps  toward  understanding  the  cosmological  implications  of  string/m-theory.  during  the
coming years, as the nonperturbative tools of string/m-theory are sharpened, physicists anticipate that
some of the most profound insights will emerge from their application to cosmological questions.

but  without  currently  having  methods  that  are  sufficiently  powerful  to  understand  cosmology
according  to  string  theory  fully,  it  is  worthwhile  to  think  about  some  general  considerations
concerning the possible role of cosmology in the search for the ultimate theory. we caution that some
of these ideas are of a more speculative nature than much of what we have discussed previously, but
they do raise issues that any purported final theory may one day have to address.

cosmological speculation and the ultimate theory

cosmology has the ability to grab hold of us at a deep, visceral level because an understanding of
how things began feels—at least to some—like the closest we may ever come to understanding why
they began. that is not to say that modern science provides a connection between the question of how
and the question of why—it doesn't—and it may well be that no such scientific connection is ever
found.  but  the  study  of  cosmology  does  hold  the  promise  of  giving  us  our  most  complete
understanding  of  the  arena  of  the  why—the  birth  of  the  universe—and  this  at  least  allows  for  a
scientifically informed view of the frame within which the questions are asked. sometimes attaining
the deepest familiarity with a question is our best substitute for actually having the answer.

in the context of searching for the ultimate theory, these lofty reflections on cosmology give way
to far more concrete considerations. the way things in the universe appear to us today—way on the
far right-hand side of the time line in figure 14.1—depends upon the fundamental laws of physics, to
be sure, but it may also depend on aspects of cosmological evolution, from the far left-hand side of
the time line, that potentially lie outside the scope of even the deepest theory.

it's not hard to imagine how this might be. think of what happens, for example, when you toss a
ball in the air. the laws of gravity govern the ball's subsequent motion, but we can't predict where the
ball will land exclusively from those laws. we must also know the velocity of the ball—its speed and
direction—as  it  left  your  hand.  that  is,  we  must  know  the initial  conditions  of  the  ball's  motion.
similarly, there are features of the universe that also have a historical contingency—the reason why a
star  formed  here  or  a  planet  there  depends  upon  a  complicated  chain  of  events  that,  at  least  in
principle, we can imagine tracing back to some feature of how the universe was when it all began.
but it is possible that even more basic features of the universe, perhaps even the properties of the
fundamental  matter  and  force  particles,  also  have  a  direct  dependence  on  historical  evolution—
evolution that itself is contingent upon the initial conditions of the universe.

in fact, we've already noted one possible incarnation of this idea in string theory: as the hot,
early universe evolved, the extra dimensions may have transmuted from shape to shape, ultimately
settling down to one particular calabi-yau space once things had cooled off sufficiently. but, like a
ball tossed in the air, the result of that journey through numerous calabi-yau shapes may well depend
on details of how the journey got started in the first place. and through the influence of the resulting
calabi-yau shape on particle masses and on properties of forces, we see that cosmological evolution
and the state of the universe when it began can have a profound impact on the physics we currently
observe.

we don't know what the initial conditions of the universe were, or even the ideas, concepts, and
language that should be used to describe them. we believe that the outrageous initial state of infinite
energy, density, and temperature that arises in the standard and inflationary cosmological models is a
signal  that  these  theories  have  broken  down  rather  than  a  correct  description  of  the  physical
conditions that actually existed. string theory offers an improvement by showing how such infinite

but even beyond the issue of initial conditions and their impact on the ensuing historical twists
and turns of cosmic evolution, some recent and highly speculative proposals have argued for yet other
potential limits on the explanatory power of any final theory. no one knows if these ideas are right or
wrong, and certainly they currently lie on the outskirts of mainstream science. but they do highlight—
albeit  in  a  rather  provocative  and  speculative  manner—an  obstacle  that  any  proposed  final  theory
may encounter.

the basic idea rests upon the following possibility. imagine that what we call the universe is
actually only one tiny part of a vastly larger cosmological expanse, one of an enormous number of
island universes scattered across a grand cosmological archipelago. although this might sound rather
far-fetched—and in the end it may well be—andrei linde has suggested a concrete mechanism that
might  lead  to  such  a  gargantuan  universe.  linde  has  found  that  the  brief  but  crucial  burst  of
inflationary  expansion  discussed  earlier  may  not  have  been  a  unique,  one-time  event.  instead,  he
argues, the conditions for inflationary expansion may happen repeatedly in isolated regions peppered
throughout the cosmos, which then undergo their own inflationary ballooning in size, evolving into
new, separate universes. and in each of these universes, the process continues, with new universes
sprouting  from  far-flung  regions  in  the  old,  generating  a  never  ending  web  of  ballooning  cosmic
expanses.  the  terminology  gets  a  little  cumbersome,  but  let's  follow  fashion  and  call  this  greatly
expanded  notion  of  the  universe  the multiverse,  with  each  of  the  constituent  parts  being  called  a
universe.

extremes might be avoided; nevertheless, no one has any insight on the question of how things actually
did  begin.  in  fact,  our  ignorance  persists  on  an  even  higher  plane:  we  don't  know  whether  the
question  of  determining  the  initial  conditions  is  one  that  is  even  sensible  to  ask  or  whether—like
asking general relativity to give insight into how hard you happened to toss a ball in the air—it is a
question  that  lies  forever  beyond  the  grasp  of  any  theory.  valiant  attempts  by  physicists  such  as
hawking and james hartle of the university of california at santa barbara have tried to bring the
question  of  cosmological  initial  conditions  within  the  umbrella  of  physical  theory,  but  all  such
attempts remain inconclusive. in the context of string/m-theory, our cosmological understanding is, at
present, just too primitive to determine whether our candidate "theory of everything" truly lives up to
its name and determines its own cosmological initial conditions, thereby elevating them to the status
of physical law. this is a prime question for future research.

the central observation is that whereas in chapter 7 we noted that everything we know points
toward  a  consistent  and  uniform  physics  throughout  our  universe,  this  may  have  no  bearing  on  the
physical attributes in these other universes so long as they are separate from us, or at least so far
away that their light has not had time to reach us. and so we can imagine that physics varies from one
universe to another. in some, the differences may be subtle: for example, the electron mass or the
strength of the strong force might be a thousandth of a percent larger or smaller than in our universe.
in others, physics may differ in more pronounced ways: the up-quark might weigh ten times what it
weighs in our universe, or the strength of the electromagnetic force might be ten times the value we
measure,  with  all  the  profound  implications  that  this  has  on  stars  and  on  life  as  we  know  it  (as
indicated in chapter 1). and in other universes, physics may differ in still more dramatic ways: the
list of elementary particles and forces may be completely distinct from ours, or, taking a cue from
string  theory,  even  the  number  of  extended  dimensions  may  differ,  with  some  cramped  universes
having as few as zero or one large spatial dimension, while other expansive universes possess eight,
nine,  or  even  ten  extended  spatial  dimensions.  if  we  let  our  imaginations  run  free,  even  the  laws
themselves can drastically differ from universe to universe. the range of possibilities is endless.

here's the point. if we scan through this huge maze of universes, the vast majority will not have
conditions hospitable to life, or at least to anything remotely akin to life as we know it. for drastic
changes in familiar physics, this is clear: if our universe truly looked like the garden-hose universe,
life as we know it would not exist. but even rather conservative changes to physics would interfere
with  the  formation  of  stars,  for  example,  disrupting  their  ability  to  act  as  cosmic  furnaces  that
synthesize  complex  life-supporting  atoms  such  as  carbon  and  oxygen  that,  normally,  are  spewed
throughout the universe by supernova explosions. in light of the sensitive dependence of life on the
details  of  physics,  if  we  now  ask,  for  instance,  why  the  forces  and  particles  of  nature  have  the
particular  properties  we  observe,  a  possible  answer  emerges: across  the  entire  multiverse,  these
features  vary  widely;  their  properties can  be  different  and are different in other universes. what's
special about the particular combination of particle and force properties we observe is that, clearly,
they  allow  life  to  form.  and  life,  intelligent  life  in  particular,  is  a  prerequisite  even  to  ask  the
question of why our universe has the properties it does. in plain language, things are the way they are
in our universe because if they weren't, we wouldn't be here to notice. like the winners of a mass
game of russian roulette, whose surprise at surviving is tempered by the realization that had they not
won, they wouldn't have been able not to feel surprised, the multiverse hypothesis has the capacity to
lessen our insistence on explaining why our universe appears as it does.

this  line  of  argument  is  a  version  of  an  idea  with  a  long  history  known  as  the anthropic
principle. as presented, it is a perspective that is diametrically opposed to the dream of a rigid, fully
predictive,  unified  theory  in  which  things  are  the  way  they  are  because  the  universe  could  not  be
otherwise.  rather  than  being  the  epitome  of  poetic  grace  in  which  everything  fits  together  with
inflexible elegance, the multiverse and the anthropic principle paint a picture of a wildly excessive
collection  of  universes  with  an  insatiable  appetite  for  variety.  it  will  be  extremely  hard,  if  not
impossible, for us ever to know if the multiverse picture is true. even if there are other universes, we
can imagine that we will never come into contact with any of them. but by vastly increasing the scope
of "what's out there"—in a manner that dwarfs hubble's realization that the milky way is but one
galaxy among many—the concept of the multiverse does at least alert us to the possibility that we may
be asking too much of an ultimate theory.

a more radical musing comes from a proposal of lee smolin of penn state university, who,
inspired by the similarity between conditions at the big bang and at the centers of black holes—each
being characterized by a colossal density of crushed matter—has suggested that every black hole is
the seed for a new universe that erupts into existence through a big bang–like explosion, but is forever

we should require that our ultimate theory give a quantum-mechanically consistent description
of  all  forces  and  all  matter.  we  should  require  that  our  ultimate  theory  give  a  cogent  cosmology
within our universe. however, if the multiverse picture is correct—a huge if—it may be asking too
much for our theory to explain, as well, the detailed properties of the particle masses, charges, and
the force strengths.

but  we  must  emphasize  that  even  if  we  accept  the  speculative  premise  of  the  multiverse,  the
conclusion that this compromises our predictive power is far from airtight. the reason, simply put, is
that if we unleash our imaginations and allow ourselves to contemplate a multiverse, we should also
unleash  our  theoretical  musings  and  contemplate  ways  in  which  the  apparent  randomness  of  the
multiverse  can  be  tamed.  for  one  relatively  conservative  musing,  we  can  imagine  that—were  the
multiverse picture true—we would be able to extend our ultimate theory to its full sprawling expanse,
and  that  our  "extended  ultimate  theory"  might  tell  us  precisely  why  and  how  the  values  of  the
fundamental parameters are sprinkled across the constituent universes.

hidden from our view by the black hole's event horizon. beyond proposing another mechanism for
generating a multiverse, smolin has injected a new element—a cosmic version of genetic mutation—
that  does  an  end  run  around  the  scientific  limitations  associated  with  the  anthropic  principle.9
imagine,  he  suggests,  that  when  a  universe  sprouts  from  the  core  of  a  black  hole,  its  physical
attributes,  such  as  particle  masses  and  force  strengths,  are  close,  but  not  identical,  to  those  of  its
parent universe. since black holes arise from extinguished stars, and star formation depends upon the
precise values of the particle masses and force strengths, the fecundity of any given universe—the
number  of  black  hole  progeny  it  can  produce—depends  sensitively  on  these  parameters.  small
variations in the parameters of the progeny universes will therefore lead to some that are even more
optimized for black hole production than their parent universe, and have an even greater number of
offspring universes of their own.10 after many "generations," the descendants of universes optimized
for producing black holes will thus be so numerous that they will overwhelm the population of the
multiverse.  and  so,  rather  than  invoking  the  anthropic  principle,  smolin's  suggestion  provides  a
dynamic  mechanism  that,  on  average,  drives  the  parameters  of  each  next-generation  universe  ever
closer to particular values—those that are optimum for black hole production.

this  approach  gives  another  method,  even  in  the  context  of  the  multiverse,  in  which  the
fundamental matter and force parameters can be explained. if smolin's theory is right, and if we are a
typical  member  of  a  mature  multiverse  (these  are  big  "ifs"  and  can  be  debated  on  many  fronts,  of
course), the parameters of the particles and forces that we measure should be optimized for black
hole production. that is, any fiddling with these parameters of our universe should make it harder for
black  holes  to  form.  physicists  have  begun  to  investigate  this  prediction;  at  present  there  is  no
consensus on its validity. but even if smolin's specific proposal turns out to be wrong, it does present
yet another shape that the ultimate theory might take. the ultimate theory may, at first sight, appear to
lack rigidity. we may find that it can describe a wealth of universes, most of which have no relevance
to the one we inhabit. and moreover, we can imagine that this wealth of universes may be physically
realized, leading to a multiverse—something that, at first sight, forever limits our predictive power.
in fact, however, this discussion illustrates that an ultimate explanation can yet be achieved, so long
as we grasp not only the ultimate laws but also their implications for cosmological evolution on an
unexpectedly grand scale.

undoubtedly, the cosmological implications of string/m-theory will be a major field of study
well into the twenty-first century. without accelerators capable of producing planck-scale energies,
we will increasingly have to rely on the cosmological accelerator of the big bang, and the relics it has
left for us throughout the universe, for our experimental data. with luck and perseverance, we may
finally be able to answer questions such as how the universe began, and why it has evolved to the
form we behold in the heavens and on earth. there is, of course, much uncharted territory between
where we are and where full answers to these fundamental questions lie. but the development of a
quantum theory of gravity through superstring theory lends credence to the hope that we now possess
theoretical tools for pushing into the vast regions of the unknown, and, no doubt after many a struggle,
possibly emerging with answers to some of the deepest questions ever posed.

part v

unification in the twenty-first century

chapter 15

prospects

centuries from now, superstring theory, or its evolution within m-theory, may have developed so far
beyond our current formulation that it might be unrecognizable even to today's leading researchers. as
we continue to seek the ultimate theory, we may well find that string theory is but one of many pivotal
steps on a path toward a far grander conception of the cosmos—a conception that involves ideas that
differ radically from anything we have previously encountered. the history of science teaches us that
each time we think that we have it all figured out, nature has a radical surprise in store for us that
requires significant and sometimes drastic changes in how we think the world works. then again, in a
bit of brash posturing, we can also imagine, as others before us have perhaps naively done, that we
are living through a landmark period in humanity's history in which the search for the ultimate laws of
the universe will finally draw to a close. as edward witten has said,

i feel that we are so close with string theory that—in my moments of greatest optimism—i
imagine  that  any  day,  the  final  form  of  the  theory  might  drop  out  of  the  sky  and  land  in
someone's lap. but more realistically, i feel that we are now in the process of constructing
a much deeper theory than anything we have had before and that well into the twenty-first
century, when i am too old to have any useful thoughts on the subject, younger physicists
will have to decide whether we have in fact found the final theory.1

although we are still feeling the aftershocks of the second superstring revolution and absorbing
the panoply of new insights that it has engendered, most string theorists agree that it will likely take a
third and maybe a fourth such theoretical upheaval before the full power of string theory is unleashed
and its possible role as the final theory assessed. as we have seen, string theory has already painted a
remarkable new picture of how the universe works, but there are significant hurdles and loose ends
that will no doubt be the primary focus of string theorists in the twenty-first century. and so, in this
last chapter we will not be able to finish telling the story of humanity's search for the deepest laws of
the universe, because the search continues. instead, let's guide our gaze into the future of string theory
by  discussing  five  central  questions  string  theorists  will  face  as  they  continue  the  pursuit  of  the
ultimate theory.

what is the fundamental principle underlying string theory?

one  overarching  lesson  we  have  learned  during  the  past  hundred  years  is  that  the  known  laws  of
physics  are  associated  with  principles  of  symmetry.  special  relativity  is  based  on  the  symmetry
embodied in the principle of relativity—the symmetry between all constant-velocity vantage points.
the gravitational force, as embodied in the general theory of relativity, is based on the equivalence

principle—the  extension  of  the  principle  of  relativity  to  embrace  all  possible  vantage  points
regardless  of  the  complexity  of  their  states  of  motion. and  the  strong,  weak,  and  electromagnetic
forces are based on the more abstract gauge symmetry principles.

physicists, as we have discussed, tend to elevate symmetry principles to a place of prominence
by putting them squarely on the pedestal of explanation. gravity, in this view, exists in order that all
possible observational vantage points are on completely equal footing—i.e., so that the equivalence
principle  holds.  similarly,  the  nongravitational  forces exist  in  order  that  nature  respect  their
associated  gauge  symmetries.  of  course,  this  approach  shifts  the  question  of  why  a  certain  force
exists to why nature respects its associated symmetry principle. but this certainly feels like progress,
especially  when  the  symmetry  in  question  is  one  that  seems  eminently  natural.  for  example,  why
should  one  observer's  frame  of  reference  be  treated  differently  from  another's?  it  seems  far  more
natural  for  the  laws  of  the  universe  to  treat  all  observational  vantage  points  equally;  this  is
accomplished through the equivalence principle and the introduction of gravity into the structure of
the cosmos. although it requires some mathematical background to appreciate fully, as we indicated
in  chapter  5,  there  is  a  similar  rationale  behind  the  gauge  symmetries  underlying  the  three
nongravitational forces.

string theory takes us down another notch on the scale of explanatory depth because all of these
symmetry  principles,  as  well  as  another—supersymmetry—emerge  from  its  structure.  in  fact,  had
history followed a different course—and had physicists come upon string theory some hundred years
earlier—we can imagine that these symmetry principles would have all been discovered by studying
its properties. but bear in mind that whereas the equivalence principle gives us some understanding
of why gravity exists, and the gauge symmetries give us some sense of why the nongravitational forces
exist, in the context of string theory these symmetries are consequences; although their importance is
in no way diminished, they are part of the end product of a much larger theoretical structure.

this  discussion  brings  the  following  question  into  sharp  relief:  is  string  theory  itself  an
inevitable  consequence  of  some  broader  principle—possibly  but  not  necessarily  a  symmetry
principle—in much the same way that the equivalence principle inexorably leads to general relativity
or that gauge symmetries lead to the nongravitational forces? as of this writing, no one has any insight
into the answer to this question. to appreciate its importance, we need only imagine einstein trying to
formulate general relativity without having had the happy thought he experienced in the bern patent
office  in  1907  that  led  him  to  the  principle  of  equivalence.  it  would  not  have  been  impossible  to
formulate  general  relativity  without  first  having  this  key  insight,  but  it  certainly  would  have  been
extremely  difficult.  the  equivalence  principle  provides  a  succinct,  systematic,  and  powerful
organizational framework for analyzing the gravitational force. the description of general relativity
we gave in chapter 3, for example, relied centrally on the equivalence principle, and its role in the
full mathematical formalism of the theory is even more crucial.

currently, string theorists are in a position analogous to an einstein bereft of the equivalence
principle. since veneziano's insightful guess in 1968, the theory has been pieced together, discovery
by  discovery,  revolution  by  revolution.  but  a  central  organizing  principle  that  embraces  these
discoveries and all other features of the theory within one overarching and systematic framework—a
framework  that  makes  the  existence  of  each  individual  ingredient  absolutely  inevitable—is  still
missing. the discovery of this principle would mark a pivotal moment in the development of string
theory,  as  it  would  likely  expose  the  theory's  inner  workings  with  unforeseen  clarity.  there  is,  of
course, no guarantee that such a fundamental principle exists, but the evolution of physics during the
last hundred years encourages string theorists to have high hopes that it does. as we look to the next

stage in the development of string theory, finding its "principle of inevitability"—that underlying idea
from which the whole theory necessarily springs forth—is of the highest priority.2

what are space and time, really, and can we do without them?

in  many  of  the  preceding  chapters,  we  have  freely  made  use  of  the  concepts  of  space  and  of
spacetime.  in  chapter  2  we  described  einstein's  realization  that  space  and  time  are  inextricably
interwoven  by  the  unexpected  fact  that  an  object's  motion  through  space  has  an  influence  on  its
passage  through  time.  in  chapter  3,  we  deepened  our  understanding  of  spacetime's  role  in  the
unfolding  of  the  cosmos  through  general  relativity,  which  shows  that  the  detailed  shape  of  the
spacetime fabric communicates the force of gravity from one place to another. the violent quantum
undulations in the microscopic structure of the fabric, as discussed in chapters 4 and 5, established
the need for a new theory, leading us to string theory. and finally, in a number of the chapters that
followed, we have seen that string theory proclaims that the universe has many more dimensions than
we  are  aware  of,  some  of  which  are  curled  up  into  tiny  but  complicated  shapes  that  can  undergo
wondrous transformations in which their fabric punctures, tears, and then repairs itself.

through graphic representations such as figures 3.4, 3.6, and 8.10, we have tried to illustrate
these ideas by envisioning the fabric of space and spacetime as if it were somewhat like a piece of
material out of which the universe is tailored. these images have considerable explanatory power;
they are used regularly by physicists as a visual guide in their own technical work. although staring at
figures such as the ones just mentioned gives a gradual impression of meaning, one can still be left
asking, what do we really mean by the fabric of the universe?

this  is  a  profound  question  that  has,  in  one  form  or  another,  been  the  subject  of  debate  for
hundreds of years. newton declared space and time to be eternal and immutable ingredients in the
makeup of the cosmos, pristine structures lying beyond the bounds of question and explanation. as he
wrote  in  the principia,  "absolute  space,  in  its  own  nature,  without  relation  to  anything  external,
remains always similar and immovable. absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and from its
own  nature,  flows  equably  without  relation  to  anything  external."3  gottfried  leibniz  and  others
vociferously  disagreed,  claiming  that  space  and  time  are  merely  bookkeeping  devices  for
conveniently summarizing relationships between objects and events within the universe. the location
of an object in space and in time has meaning only in comparison with another. space and time are the
vocabulary  of  these  relations,  but  nothing  more.  although  newton's  view,  supported  by  his
experimentally successful three laws of motion, held sway for more than two hundred years, leibniz's
conception,  further  developed  by  the austrian  physicist  ernst  mach,  is  much  closer  to  our  current
picture. as we have seen, einstein's special and general theories of relativity firmly did away with
the concept of an absolute and universal notion of space and time. but we can still ask whether the
geometrical model of spacetime that plays such a pivotal role in general relativity and in string theory
is solely a convenient shorthand for the spatial and temporal relations between various locations, or
whether  we  should  view  ourselves  as  truly  being  embedded  in something  when  we  refer  to  our
immersion within the spacetime fabric.

although we are heading into speculative territory, string theory does suggest an answer to this
question. the graviton, the smallest bundle of gravitational force, is one particular pattern of string
vibration. and  just  as  an  electromagnetic  field  such  as  visible  light  is  composed  of  an  enormous
number of photons, a gravitational field is composed of an enormous number of gravitons—that is, an

enormous number of strings executing the graviton vibrational pattern. gravitational fields, in turn,
are encoded in the warping of the spacetime fabric, and hence we are led to identify the fabric of
spacetime itself with a colossal number of strings all undergoing the same, orderly, graviton pattern
of vibration. in the language of the field, such an enormous, organized array of similarly vibrating
strings is known as a coherent state of strings. it's a rather poetic image—the strings of string theory
as the threads of the spacetime fabric—but we should note that its rigorous meaning has yet to be
worked out completely.

nevertheless,  describing  the  spacetime  fabric  in  this  string-stitched  form  does  lead  us  to
contemplate the following question. an ordinary piece of fabric is the end product of someone having
carefully woven together individual threads, the raw material of common textiles. similarly, we can
ask  ourselves  whether  there  is  a  raw  precursor  to  the  fabric  of  spacetime—a  configuration  of  the
strings  of  the  cosmic  fabric  in  which  they  have  not  yet  coalesced  into  the  organized  form  that  we
recognize as spacetime. notice that it is somewhat inaccurate to picture this state as a jumbled mass
of  individual  vibrating  strings  that  have  yet  to  stitch  themselves  together  into  an  ordered  whole
because, in our usual way of thinking, this presupposes a notion of both space and time—the space in
which a string vibrates and the progression of time that allows us to follow its changes in shape from
one moment to the next. but in the raw state, before the strings that make up the cosmic fabric engage
in the orderly, coherent vibrational dance we are discussing, there is no realization of space or time.
even our language is too coarse to handle these ideas, for, in fact, there is even no notion of before. in
a sense, it's as if individual strings are "shards" of space and time, and only when they appropriately
undergo sympathetic vibrations do the conventional notions of space and time emerge.

imagining such a structureless, primal state of existence, one in which there is no notion of space
or  time  as  we  know  it,  pushes  most  people's  powers  of  comprehension  to  their  limit  (it  certainly
pushes mine). like the stephen wright one-liner about the photographer who is obsessed with getting
a close-up shot of the horizon, we run up against a clash of paradigms when we try to envision a
universe that is, but that somehow does not invoke the concepts of space or time. nevertheless, it is
likely that we will need to come to terms with such ideas and understand their implementation before
we  can  fully  assess  string  theory.  the  reason  is  that  our  present  formulation  of  string  theory
presupposes the existence of space and time within which strings (and the other ingredients found in
m-theory) move about and vibrate. this allows us to deduce the physical properties of string theory
in a universe with one time dimension, a certain number of extended space dimensions (usually taken
to  be  three),  and  additional  dimensions  that  are  curled  up  into  one  of  the  shapes  allowed  by  the
equations of the theory. but this is somewhat like assessing an artist's creative talent by requiring that
she work from a paint-by-number kit. she will, undoubtedly, add a personal flair here or there, but by
so tightly constraining the format of her work, we are blinding ourselves to all but a slender view of
her  abilities.  similarly,  since  the  triumph  of  string  theory  is  its  natural  incorporation  of  quantum
mechanics and gravity, and since gravity is bound up with the form of space and time, we should not
constrain the theory by forcing it to operate within an already existing spacetime framework. rather,
just as we should allow our artist to work from a blank canvas, we should allow string theory to
create its own spacetime arena by starting in a spaceless and timeless configuration.

the hope is that from this blank slate starting point—possibly in an era that existed before the
big  bang  or  the  pre–big  bang  (if  we  can  use  temporal  terms,  for  lack  of  any  other  linguistic
framework)—the theory will describe a universe that evolves to a form in which a background of
coherent  string  vibrations  emerges,  yielding  the  conventional  notions  of  space  and  time.  such  a
framework, if realized, would show that space, time, and, by association, dimension are not essential

defining elements of the universe. rather, they are convenient notions that emerge from a more basic,
atavistic, and primary state.

already,  cutting-edge  research  on  aspects  of  m-theory,  spearheaded  by  stephen  shenker,
edward witten, tom banks, willy fischler, leonard susskind, and others too numerous to name, has
shown that something known as a zero-brane—possibly the most fundamental ingredient in m-theory,
an object that behaves somewhat like a point particle at large distances but has drastically different
properties at short ones—may give us a glimpse of the spaceless and timeless realm. their work has
revealed  that  whereas  strings  show  us  that  conventional  notions  of  space  cease  to  have  relevance
below the planck scale, the zero-branes give essentially the same conclusion but also provide a tiny
window  on  the  new  unconventional  framework  that  takes  over.  studies  with  these  zero-branes
indicate  that  ordinary  geometry  is  replaced  by  something  known  as noncommutative  geometry,  an
area  of  mathematics  developed  in  large  part  by  the  french  mathematician alain  connes.4  in  this
geometrical framework, the conventional notions of space and of distance between points melt away,
leaving  us  in  a  vastly  different  conceptual  landscape.  nevertheless,  as  we  focus  our  attention  on
scales larger than the planck length, physicists have shown that our conventional notion of space does
re-emerge. it is likely that the framework of noncommutative geometry is still some significant steps
away  from  the  blank-slate  state  anticipated  above,  but  it  does  give  us  a  hint  of  what  the  more
complete framework for incorporating space and time may involve.

finding the correct mathematical apparatus for formulating string theory without recourse to a
pre-existing notion of space and time is one of the most important issues facing string theorists. an
understanding  of  how  space  and  time  emerge  would  take  us  a  huge  step  closer  to  answering  the
crucial question of which geometrical form actually does emerge.

will string theory lead to a reformulation of quantum mechanics?

the universe is governed by the principles of quantum mechanics to fantastic accuracy. even so, in
formulating theories over the past half century, physicists have followed a strategy that, structurally
speaking,  places  quantum  mechanics  in  a  somewhat  secondary  position.  in  devising  theories,
physicists often start by working in a purely classical language that ignores quantum probabilities,
wave functions, and so forth—a language that would be perfectly intelligible to physicists in the age
of maxwell and even in the age of newton—and then, subsequently, overlaying quantum concepts
upon the classical framework. this approach is not particularly surprising, since it directly mirrors
our  experiences. at  first  blush,  the  universe  appears  to  be  governed  by  laws  rooted  in  classical
concepts such as a particle having a definite position and a definite velocity at any given moment in
time. it is only after detailed microscopic scrutiny that we realize that we must modify such familiar
classical ideas. our process of discovery has gone from a classical framework to one that is modified
by quantum revelations, and this progression is echoed in the way that physicists, to this day, go about
constructing their theories.

this  is  certainly  the  case  with  string  theory.  the  mathematical  formalism  describing  string
theory begins with equations that describe the motion of a tiny, infinitely thin piece of classical thread
—equations that, to a large extent, newton could have written down some three hundred years ago.
these equations are then quantized. that is, in a systematic manner developed by physicists over the
course  of  more  than  50  years,  the  classical  equations  are  converted  into  a  quantum-mechanical
framework in which probabilities, uncertainty, quantum jitters, and so on are directly incorporated. in

fact,  in  chapter  12  we  have  seen  this  procedure  in  action:  the  loop  processes  (see  figure  12.6)
incorporate quantum concepts—in this case, the momentary quantum-mechanical creation of virtual
string  pairs—with  the  number  of  loops  determining  the  precision  with  which  quantum-mechanical
effects are accounted for.

the strategy of beginning with a theoretical description that is classical and then subsequently
including the features of quantum mechanics has been extremely fruitful for many years. it underlies,
for example, the standard model of particle physics. but it is possible, and there is growing evidence
that it is likely, that this method is too conservative for dealing with theories that are as far-reaching
as string theory and m-theory. the reason is that once we realize that the universe is governed by
quantum-mechanical principles, our theories really should be quantum mechanical from the start. we
have successfully gotten away with starting from a classical perspective until now because we have
not been probing the universe at a deep enough level for this coarse approach to mislead us. but with
the  depth  of  string/m-theory,  we  may  well  have  come  to  the  end  of  the  line  for  this  battle-tested
strategy.

we can find specific evidence for this by reconsidering some of the insights emerging from the
second superstring revolution (as summarized, for example, by figure 12.11). as we discussed in
chapter  12,  the  dualities  underlying  the  unity  of  the  five  string  theories  show  us  that  physical
processes that occur in any one string formulation can be reinterpreted in the dual language of any of
the others. this rephrasing will at first appear to have little to do with the original description, but, in
fact,  this  is  simply  the  power  of  duality  at  work:  through  duality,  one  physical  process  can  be
described in a number of vastly different ways. these results are both subtle and remarkable, but we
have not yet mentioned what may well be their most important feature.

that 

the duality translations often take a process, described in one of the five string theories, that is
strongly dependent on quantum mechanics (for example, a process involving string interactions that
would  not  happen  if  the  world  were  governed  by  classical,  as  opposed  to  quantum,  physics)  and
reformulate it as a process that is weakly dependent on quantum mechanics from the perspective of
one  of  the  other  string  theories  (for  example,  a  process  whose  detailed  numerical  properties  are
influenced by quantum considerations but whose qualitative form is similar to what it would be in a
purely  classical  world).  this  means  that  quantum  mechanics  is  thoroughly  intertwined  within  the
string/m-theory:  they  are inherently  quantum-mechanical
duality 
symmetries, since one of the dual descriptions is strongly influenced by quantum considerations. this
indicates  forcefully 
that
fundamentally  incorporates  the  newfound  duality  symmetries—cannot  begin  classically  and  then
undergo  quantization,  in  the  traditional  mold.  a  classical  starting  point  will  necessarily  omit  the
duality symmetries, since they hold true only when quantum mechanics is taken into account. rather, it
appears that the complete formulation of string/m-theory must break the traditional mold and spring
into existence as a full-fledged quantum-mechanical theory.

the  complete  formulation  of  string/m-theory—a  formulation 

symmetries  underlying 

currently, no one knows how to do this. but many string theorists foresee a reformulation of how
quantum principles are incorporated into our theoretical description of the universe as the next major
upheaval in our understanding. for example, as cumrun vafa has said, "i think that a reformulation of
quantum mechanics which will resolve many of its puzzles is just around the corner. i think many
share the view that the recently uncovered dualities point toward a new, more geometrical framework
for  quantum  mechanics,  in  which  space,  time,  and  quantum  properties  will  be  inseparably  joined
together."5 and according to edward witten, "i believe the logical status of quantum mechanics is
going to change in a manner that is similar to the way that the logical status of gravity changed when

einstein  discovered  the  equivalence  principle.  this  process  is  far  from  complete  with  quantum
mechanics, but i think that people will one day look back on our epoch as the period when it began."6
with guarded optimism, we can envision that a reframing of the principles of quantum mechanics
within string theory may yield a more powerful formalism that is capable of giving us an answer to
the question of how the universe began and why there are such things as space and time—a formalism
that will take us one step closer to answering leibniz's question of why there is something rather than
nothing.

can string theory be experimentally tested?

among  the  many  features  of  string  theory  that  we  have  discussed  in  the  preceding  chapters,  the
following three are perhaps the most important ones to keep firmly in mind. first, gravity and quantum
mechanics are part and parcel of how the universe works and therefore any purported unified theory
must incorporate both. string theory accomplishes this. second, studies by physicists over the past
century  have  revealed  that  there  are  other  key  ideas—many  of  which  have  been  experimentally
confirmed—that appear central to our understanding of the universe. these include the concepts of
spin, the family structure of matter particles, messenger particles, gauge symmetry, the equivalence
principle,  symmetry  breaking,  and  supersymmetry,  to  name  a  few.  all  of  these  concepts  emerge
naturally  from  string  theory.  third,  unlike  more  conventional  theories  such  as  the  standard  model,
which  has  19  free  parameters  that  can  be  adjusted  to  ensure  agreement  with  experimental
measurements,  string  theory  has  no  adjustable  parameters.  in  principle,  its  implications  should  be
thoroughly  definitive—they  should  provide  an  unambiguous  test  of  whether  the  theory  is  right  or
wrong.

the road from this "in principle" ratiocination to an "in practice" fact is encumbered by many
hurdles. in chapter 9 we described some of the technical obstacles, such as determining the form of
the extra dimensions, that currently stand in our way. in chapters 12 and 13 we placed these and other
obstacles in the broader context of our need for an exact understanding of string theory, which, as we
have  seen,  naturally  leads  us  to  the  consideration  of  m-theory.  no  doubt,  achieving  a  full
understanding  of  string/m-theory  will  require  a  great  deal  of  hard  work  and  an  equal  amount  of
ingenuity.

at every step of the way, string theorists have sought and will continue to seek experimentally
observable  consequences  of  the  theory.  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  long-shot  possibilities  for
finding evidence of string theory discussed in chapter 9. furthermore, as our understanding deepens
there will, no doubt, be other rare processes or features of string theory that will suggest yet other
indirect experimental signatures.

but  most  notably,  the  confirmation  of  supersymmetry,  through  the  discovery  of  superpartner
particles  as  discussed  in  chapter  9,  would  be  a  major  milestone  for  string  theory.  we  recall  that
supersymmetry was discovered in the course of theoretical investigations of string theory, and that it
is  a  central  part  of  the  theory.  its  experimental  confirmation  would  be  a  compelling,  albeit
circumstantial,  piece  of  evidence  for  strings.  moreover,  finding  the  superpartner  particles  would
provide a welcome challenge, since the discovery of supersymmetry would do far more than merely
answer the yes-no question of its relevance to our world. the masses and charges of the superpartner
particles  would  reveal  the  detailed  way  in  which  supersymmetry  is  incorporated  into  the  laws  of
nature. string theorists would then face the challenge of seeing whether this implementation can be

fully realized or explained by string theory. of course, we can be even more optimistic and hope that
within  the  next  decade—before  the  large  hadron  collider  in  geneva  comes  on-line—the
understanding  of  string  theory  will  have  progressed  sufficiently  for  detailed  predictions  about  the
superpartners to be made prior to their hoped-for discovery. confirmation of such predictions would
be a monumental moment in the history of science.

are there limits to explanation?

explaining everything, even in the circumscribed sense of understanding all aspects of the forces and
the elementary constituents of the universe, is one of the greatest challenges science has ever faced.
and for the first time, superstring theory gives us a framework that appears to have sufficient depth to
meet  the  challenge.  but  will  we  ever  realize  the  promise  of  the  theory  fully  and,  for  example,
calculate the masses of the quarks or the strength of the electromagnetic force, numbers whose precise
values dictate so much about the universe? as in the previous sections, we will have to surmount
numerous theoretical hurdles on the way to these goals—currently, the most prominent is achieving a
full nonperturbative formulation of string/m-theory.

but is it possible that even if we had an exact understanding of string/-m-theory, framed within a
new and far more transparent formulation of quantum mechanics, we could still fail in our quest to
calculate  particle  masses  and  force  strength?  is  it  possible  that  we  would  still  have  to  resort  to
experimental  measurements,  rather  than  theoretical  calculations,  for  their  values? and,  moreover,
might it be that this failing does not mean that we need to look for an even deeper theory, but simply
reflects that there is no explanation for these observed properties of reality?

one immediate answer to all these questions is yes. as einstein said some time ago, "the most
incomprehensible  thing  about  the  universe  is  that  it  is  comprehensible."7  the  astonishment  at  our
ability  to  understand  the  universe  at  all  is  easily  lost  sight  of  in  an  age  of  rapid  and  impressive
progress. however, maybe there is a limit to comprehensibility. maybe we have to accept that after
reaching  the  deepest  possible  level  of  understanding  science  can  offer,  there  will  nevertheless  be
aspects of the universe that remain unexplained. maybe we will have to accept that certain features of
the universe are the way they are because of happenstance, accident, or divine choice. the success of
the scientific method in the past has encouraged us to think that with enough time and effort we can
unravel nature's mysteries. but hitting the absolute limit of scientific explanation—not a technological
obstacle or the current but progressing edge of human understanding—would be a singular event, one
for which past experience could not prepare us.

although of great relevance to our quest for the ultimate theory, this is an issue we cannot yet
resolve; indeed, the possibility that there are limits to scientific explanation, in the broad way we
have  stated  it,  is  an  issue  that  may  never  be  resolved.  we  have  seen,  for  instance,  that  even  the
speculative  notion  of  the  multiverse,  which  at  first  sight  appears  to  present  a  definite  limit  to
scientific explanation, can be dealt with by dreaming up equally speculative theories that, at least in
principle, can restore predictive power.

one highlight emerging from these considerations is the role of cosmology in determining the
implications of an ultimate theory. as we have discussed, superstring cosmology is a young field,
even by the youthful standards set by string theory itself. it will, undoubtedly, be an area of primary
research focus for years to come, and it is likely to be one of the major growth areas of the field. as
we  continue  to  gain  new  insight  into  the  properties  of  string/m-theory,  our  ability  to  assess  the

cosmological  implications  of  this  rich  attempt  at  a  unified  theory  will  become  ever  sharper.  it  is
possible,  of  course,  that  such  studies  may  one  day  convince  us  that,  indeed,  there  is  a  limit  to
scientific explanation. but it is also possible, to the contrary, that they will usher in a new era—an
era in which we can declare that a fundamental explanation of the universe has finally been found.

reaching for the stars

although we are technologically bound to the earth and its immediate neighbors in the solar system,
through the power of thought and experiment we have probed the far reaches of both inner and outer
space. during the last hundred years in particular, the collective effort of numerous physicists has
revealed some of nature's best-kept secrets. and once revealed, these explanatory gems have opened
vistas on a world we thought we knew, but whose splendor we had not even come close to imagining.
one measure of the depth of a physical theory is the extent to which it poses serious challenges to
aspects  of  our  worldview  that  had  previously  seemed  immutable.  by  this  measure,  quantum
mechanics  and  the  theories  of  relativity  are  deep  beyond  anyone's  wildest  expectations:  wave
functions, probabilities, quantum tunneling, the ceaseless roiling energy fluctuations of the vacuum,
the  smearing  together  of  space  and  time,  the  relative  nature  of  simultaneity,  the  warping  of  the
spacetime fabric, black holes, the big bang. who could have guessed that the intuitive, mechanical,
clockwork newtonian perspective would turn out to be so thoroughly parochial—that there was a
whole  new  mind-boggling  world  lying  just  beneath  the  surface  of  things  as  they  are  ordinarily
experienced?

but even these paradigm-shaking discoveries are only part of a larger, all-encompassing story.
with  solid  faith  that  laws  of  the  large  and  the  small  should  fit  together  into  a  coherent  whole,
physicists are relentlessly hunting down the elusive unified theory. the search is not over, but through
superstring  theory  and  its  evolution  into  m-theory,  a  cogent  framework  for  merging  quantum
mechanics, general relativity, and the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces has finally emerged.
and  the  challenges  these  developments  pose  to  our  previous  way  of  seeing  the  world  are
monumental: loops of strings and oscillating globules, uniting all of creation into vibrational patterns
that are meticulously executed in a universe with numerous hidden dimensions capable of undergoing
extreme contortions in which their spatial fabric tears apart and then repairs itself. who could have
guessed that the merging of gravity and quantum mechanics into a unified theory of all matter and all
forces would yield such a revolution in our understanding of how the universe works?

no  doubt,  there  are  even  grander  surprises  in  store  for  us  as  we  continue  to  seek  a  full  and
calculationally tractable understanding of superstring theory. already, through studies in m-theory,
we have seen glimpses of a strange new domain of the universe lurking beneath the planck length,
possibly one in which there is no notion of time or space. at the opposite extreme, we have also seen
that our universe may merely be one of the innumerable frothing bubbles on the surface of a vast and
turbulent cosmic ocean called the multiverse. these ideas are at the current edge of speculation, but
they may presage the next leap in our understanding of the universe.

as we fix our sight on the future and anticipate all the wonders yet in store for us, we should
also reflect back and marvel at the journey we have taken so far. the search for the fundamental laws
of the universe is a distinctly human drama, one that has stretched the mind and enriched the spirit.
einstein's vivid description of his own quest to understand gravity—"the years of anxious searching
in  the  dark,  with  their  intense  longing,  their  alternations  of  confidence  and  exhaustion,  and  final

emergence into the light"8—encompasses, surely, the whole human struggle. we are all, each in our
own way, seekers of the truth and we each long for an answer to why we are here. as we collectively
scale  the  mountain  of  explanation,  each  generation  stands  firmly  on  the  shoulders  of  the  previous,
bravely reaching for the peak. whether any of our descendants will ever take in the view from the
summit and gaze out on the vast and elegant universe with a perspective of infinite clarity, we cannot
predict. but as each generation climbs a little higher, we realize jacob bronowski's pronouncement
that "in every age there is a turning point, a new way of seeing and asserting the coherence of the
world."9 and as our generation marvels at our new view of the universe—our new way of asserting
the world's coherence—we are fulfilling our part, contributing our rung to the human ladder reaching
for the stars.

notes

chapter 1

1. the table below is an elaboration of table 1.1. it records the masses and force charges of the
particles of all three families. each type of quark can carry three possible strong-force charges that
are, somewhat fancifully, labeled as colors—they stand for numerical strong-force charges values.
the weak charges recorded are, more precisely, the "third-component" of weak isospin. (we have
not listed the "right-handed" components of the particles—they differ by having no weak charge.)

2. strings can also have two freely moving ends (so-called open strings) in addition to the loops
(closed strings) illustrated in figure 1.1. to ease our presentation, for the most part we will focus on
closed strings, although essentially all of what we say applies to both.

3. albert  einstein,  in  a  1942  letter  to  a  friend,  as  quoted  in  tony  hey  and  patrick  walters,

einstein's mirror (cambridge, eng.: cambridge university press, 1997).

4. steven weinberg, dreams of a final theory (new york: pantheon, 1992), p.52.
5. interview with edward witten, may 11, 1998.

chapter 2

1.  the  presence  of  massive  bodies  like  the  earth  does  complicate  matters  by  introducing
gravitational  forces.  since  we  are  now  focusing  on  motion  in  the  horizontal  direction—not  the
vertical direction—we can and will ignore the earth's presence. in the next chapter we will undertake
a thorough discussion of gravity.

2. more precisely, the speed of light through the vacuum of empty space is 670 million miles
per hour. when light travels through a substance such as air or glass its speed is decreased in roughly
the same way that a rock dropped from a cliff is dragged to a slower speed when it enters a body of
water.  this  slowing  of  light  relative  to  its  speed  through  a  vacuum  is  of  no  consequence  for  our
discussion of relativity and is justifiably ignored throughout the text.

3.  for  the  mathematically  inclined  reader,  we  note  that  these  observations  can  be  turned  into
quantitative statements. for instance, if the moving light clock has speed v and it takes t seconds for
its photon to complete one round-trip journey (as measured by our stationary light clock), then the
light clock will have traveled a distance vt when its photon has returned to the lower mirror. we can
now use the pythagorean theorem to calculate that the length of each of the diagonal paths in figure
(vt/2)2 + h2, where h is the distance between the two mirrors of a light clock (taken to be six
2.3 is 
inches  in  the  text).  the  two  diagonal  paths,  taken  together,  therefore  have  length  2 (vt/2)2  + h2  .
since the speed of light has a constant value, conventionally called c, it takes light 2 (vt/2)2  + h2/c
seconds to complete the double diagonal journey. and so, we have the equality t = 2 (vt/2)2 + h2/c,
which can be solved for t, yielding t = 2h/ c2-v2. to avoid confusion, let's write this as tmoving = 2h/
c2-v2, where the subscript indicates that this is the time we measure for one tick to occur on the
moving clock. on the other hand, the time for one tick on our stationary clock is tstationary = 2h/c and
as a little algebra reveals, tmoving  = tstationary/ 1-v2/c2, directly showing that one tick on the moving
clock takes longer than one tick on the stationary clock. this means that between chosen events, fewer
total  ticks  will  take  place  on  the  moving  clock  than  on  the  stationary,  ensuring  that  less  time  has
elapsed for the observer in motion.

4. in case you would be more convinced by an experiment carried out in a less esoteric setting
than  a  particle  accelerator,  consider  the  following.  during  october  1971,  j.  c.  hafele,  then  of
washington university in st. louis, and richard keating of the united states naval observatory flew
cesium-beam atomic clocks on commercial airliners for some 40 hours. after taking into account a
number of subtle features having to do with gravitational effects (to be discussed in the next chapter),
special relativity claims that the total elapsed time on the moving atomic clocks should be less than
the elapsed time on stationary earthbound counterparts by a few hundred billionths of a second. this
is just what hafele and keating found: time really does slow down for a clock in motion.

5.  although  figure  2.4  correctly  illustrates  the  shrinking  of  an  object  along  its  direction  of
motion, the image does not illustrate what we would actually see if an object were somehow to blaze
by at nearly light speed (assuming our eyesight or photographic equipment were sharp enough to see
anything at all!). to see something, our eyes—or our camera—must receive light that has reflected off

the object's surface. but since the reflected light travels to us from various locations on the object, the
light we see at any moment traveled to us along paths of different lengths. this results in a kind of
relativistic visual illusion in which the object will appear both foreshortened and rotated.

6. for the mathematically inclined reader, we note that from the spacetime position 4-vector x =
(ct, x1, x2, x3) = (ct,  ) we can produce the velocity 4-vector u = dx/dt, where t is the proper time
defined by dt2 = dt2-c-2(dx2
3). then, the "speed through spacetime" is the magnitude of
((c2dt2-dx 2)/(dt2-c-2dx 2)), which is identically the speed of light, c. now, we can
the 4-vector u, 
rearrange the equation c2(dt/dt)2-(d /d )2  = c2, to be c2(d /dt)2 + (d /dt)2  = c2. this shows that an
(d /dt)2 must be accompanied by a decrease in dt/dt,
increase in an object's speed through space, 
the latter being the object's speed through time (the rate at which time elapses on its own clock, dt, as
compared with that on our stationary clock, dt).

2 + dx2

1 + dx2

chapter 3

1. isaac newton, sir isaac newton's mathematical principle of natural philosophy and his
system of the world, trans. a. motte and florian cajori (berkeley: university of california press,
1962), vol. i, p. 634.

2. a bit more precisely, einstein realized that the equivalence principle holds so long as your
observations are confined to a small enough region of space—that is, so long as your "compartment"
is  small  enough.  the  reason  is  the  following.  gravitational  fields  can  vary  in  strength  (and  in
direction) from place to place. but we are imagining that your whole compartment accelerates as a
single unit and therefore your acceleration simulates a single, uniform gravitational force field. as
your compartment gets ever smaller, though, there is ever less room over which a gravitational field
can  vary,  and  hence  the  equivalence  principle  becomes  ever  more  applicable.  technically,  the
difference between the uniform gravitational field simulated by an accelerated vantage point and a
possibly nonuniform "real" gravitational field created by some collection of massive bodies is known
as  the  "tidal"  gravitational  field  (since  it  accounts  for  the  moon's  gravitational  effect  on  tides  on
earth). this endnote, therefore, can be summarized by saying that tidal gravitational fields become
less noticeable as the size of your compartment gets smaller, making accelerated motion and a "real"
gravitational field indistinguishable.

3. albert einstein, as quoted in albrecht fölsing, albert einstein (new york: viking, 1997), p.

315.

4.  john  stachel,  "einstein  and  the  rigidly  rotating  disk,"  in general  relativity  and

gravitation, ed. a. held (new york: plenum, 1980), p. 1.

5. analysis of the tornado ride, or the "rigidly rotating disk," as it is called in more technical
language, easily leads to confusion. in fact, to this day there is not universal agreement on a number of
subtle aspects of this example. in the text we have followed the spirit of einstein's own analysis, and
in this endnote we continue to take this viewpoint and seek to clarify a couple of features that you may
have  found  confusing.  first,  you  may  be  puzzled  about  why  the  circumference  of  the  ride  is  not
lorentz contracted in exactly the same way as the ruler, and hence measured by slim to have the same
length  as  we  originally  found.  bear  in  mind,  though,  that  throughout  our  discussion  the  ride  was
always  spinning;  we never  analyzed  the  ride  when  it  was  at  rest.  thus,  from  our  perspective  as
stationary  observers,  the  only  difference  between  our  and  slim's  measurement  of  the  ride's
circumference is that slim's ruler is lorentz contracted; the spinning tornado ride was spinning when
we performed our measurement, and it is spinning as we watch slim carry out his. since we see that

his ruler is contracted, we realize that he will have to lay it out more times to traverse the entire
circumference,  thereby  measuring  a  longer  length  than  we  did.  lorentz  contraction  of  the  ride's
circumference  would  have  been  relevant  only  if  we  compared  the  properties  of  the  ride  when
spinning and when at rest, but this is a comparison we did not need.

second, notwithstanding the fact that we did not need to analyze the ride when it was at rest, you
may still be wondering about what would happen when it does slow down and stop. now, it would
seem,  we  must  take  account  of  the  changing  circumference  with  changing  speed  due  to  different
degrees of lorentz contraction. but how can this be squared with an unchanging radius? this is a
subtle problem whose resolution hinges on the fact that there are no fully rigid objects in the real
world. objects can stretch and bend and thereby accommodate the stretching or contracting we have
come  upon;  if  not,  as  einstein  pointed  out,  a  rotating  disk  that  was  initially  formed  by  allowing  a
spinning cast of molten metal to cool while in motion would break apart if its rate of spinning were
subsequently  changed.  for  more  details  on  the  history  of  the  rigidly  rotating  disk,  see  stachel,
"einstein and the rigidly rotating disk."

6. the expert reader will recognize that in the example of the tornado ride, that is, in the case of
a uniformly rotating frame of reference, the curved three-dimensional spatial sections on which we
have focused fit together into a four-dimensional spacetime whose curvature still vanishes.

7. hermann minkowski, as quoted in fölsing, albert einstein, p. 189.
8. interview with john wheeler, january 27, 1998.
9. even so, existing atomic clocks are sufficiently accurate to detect such tiny—and even tinier
—time warps. for instance, in 1976 robert vessot and martin levine of the harvard-smithsonian
astrophysical  observatory,  together  with  collaboraters  at  the  national  aeronautics  and  space
administration (nasa), launched a scout d rocket from wallops island, virginia, that carried an
atomic clock accurate to about a trillionth of a second per hour. they hoped to show that as the rocket
gained altitude (thereby decreasing the effect of the earth's gravitational pull), an identical earthbound
atomic clock (still subject to the full force of the earth's gravity) would tick more slowly. through a
two-way stream of microwave signals, the researchers were able to compare the rate of ticking of the
two atomic clocks and, indeed, at the rocket's maximum altitude of 6,000 miles, its atomic clock ran
fast  by  about  4  parts  per  billion  relative  to  its  counterpart  on  earth,  agreeing  with  theoretical
predictions to better than a hundredth of a percent.

10.  in  the  mid-1800s,  the  french  scientist  urbain  jean  joseph  le  verrier  discovered  that  the
planet mercury deviates slightly from the orbit around the sun that is predicted by newton's law of
gravity.  for  more  than  half  a  century,  explanations  for  this  so-called  excess  orbital  perihelion
precession  (in  plain  language,  at  the  end  of  each  orbit,  mercury  does  not  quite  wind  up  where
newton's theory says it should) ran the gamut—the gravitational influence of an undiscovered planet
or planetary ring, an undiscovered moon, the effect of interplanetary dust, the oblateness of the sun—
but  none  was  sufficiently  compelling  to  win  general  acceptance.  in  1915,  einstein  calculated  the
perihelion  precession  of  mercury  using  his  newfound  equations  of  general  relativity  and  found  an
answer  that,  by  his  own  admission,  gave  him  heart  palpitations:  the  result  from  general  relativity
precisely matched observations. this success, certainly, was one significant reason that einstein had
such faith in his theory, but most everyone else awaited confirmation of a prediction, rather than an
explanation of a previously known anomaly. for more details, see abraham pais, subtle is the lord
(new york: oxford university press, 1982), p. 253.

11.  robert  p.  crease  and  charles  c.  mann,  the  second  creation  (new  brunswick,  n.j.:

rutgers university press, 1996), p. 39.

12.  surprisingly,  recent  research  on  the  detailed  rate  of  cosmic  expansion  suggests  that  the

universe may in fact incorporate a very small but nonzero cosmological constant.

1. richard feynman, the character of physical law (cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1965), p.

chapter 4

129.

2. although planck's work did solve the infinite energy puzzle, apparently this goal was not what
directly motivated his work. rather, planck was seeking to understand a closely related issue: the
experimental results concerning how energy in a hot oven—a "black body" to be more precise—is
distributed over various wavelength ranges. for more details on the history of these developments,
the  interested  reader  should  consult  thomas  s.  kuhn, black-body  theory  and  the  quantum
discontinuity, 1894–1912 (oxford, eng.: clarendon, 1978).

3. a little more precisely, planck showed that waves whose minimum energy content exceeds
their  purported average  energy  contribution  (according  to  nineteenth-century  thermodynamics)  are
exponentially suppressed. this suppression is increasingly sharp as we examine waves of ever larger
frequency.

4. planck's constant is 1.05 × 10-27 grams-centimeters2/second.
5. timothy ferris, coming of age in the milky way (new york: anchor, 1989), p. 286.
6. stephen hawking, lecture at the amsterdam symposium on gravity, black holes, and string

theory, june 21, 1997.

7. it is worthwhile to note that feynman's approach to quantum mechanics can be used to derive
the  approach  based  on  wave  functions,  and  vice  versa;  the  two  approaches,  therefore,  are  fully
equivalent.  nevertheless,  the  concepts,  the  language,  and  the  interpretation  that  each  approach
emphasizes are rather different, even though the answers each gives are absolutely identical.

8.  richard  feynman, qed:  the  strange  theory  of  light  and  matter  (princeton:  princeton

university press, 1988).

chapter 5

1. stephen hawking, a brief history of time (new york: bantam books, 1988), p. 175.
2. richard feynman, as quoted in timothy ferris, the whole shebang (new york: simon &

schuster, 1997), p. 97.

3. in case you are still perplexed about how anything at all can happen within a region of space
that is empty, it is important to realize that the uncertainty principle places a limit on how "empty" a
region  of  space  can  actually  be;  it  modifies  what  we  mean  by  empty  space.  for  example,  when
applied  to  wave  disturbances  in  a  field  (such  as  electromagnetic  waves  traveling  in  the
electromagnetic  field)  the  uncertainty  principle  shows  that  the  amplitude  of  a  wave  and  the  speed
with which its amplitude changes are subject to the same inverse relationship as are the position and
speed of a particle: the more precisely the amplitude is specified the less we can possibly know
about the speed with which its amplitude changes. now, when we say that a region of space is empty,
we typically mean that, among other things, there are no waves passing through it, and that all fields
have  value  zero.  in  clumsy  but  ultimately  useful  language,  we  can  rephrase  this  by  saying  that  the
amplitudes of all waves that pass through the region are zero, exactly. but if we know the amplitudes
exactly,  the  uncertainty  principle  implies  that  the  rate  of  change  of  the  amplitudes  is  completely
uncertain and can take on essentially any value. but if the amplitudes change, this means that in the
next moment they will no longer be zero, even though the region of space is still "empty." again, on

average the field will be zero since at some places its value will be positive while at others negative;
on  average  the  net  energy  in  the  region  has  not  changed.  but  this  is  only  on  average.  quantum
uncertainty implies that the energy in the field—even in an empty region of space—fluctuates up and
down,  with  the  size  of  the  fluctuations  getting  larger  as  the  distance  and  time  scales  on  which  the
region is examined get smaller. the energy embodied in such momentary field fluctuations can then,
through e  = mc2,  be  converted  into  the  momentary  creation  of  pairs  of  particles  and  their
antiparticles, which annihilate each other in great haste, to keep the energy from changing, on average.
4. even though the initial equation that schrödinger wrote down—the one incorporating special
relativity—did not accurately describe the quantum-mechanical properties of electrons in hydrogen
atoms, it was soon realized to be a valuable equation when appropriately used in other contexts, and,
in fact, is still in use today. however, by the time schrödinger published his equation he had been
scooped by oskar klein and walter gordon, and hence his relativistic equation is called the "klein-
gordon equation."

7. the size of the planck length can be understood based upon simple reasoning rooted in what
physicists call dimensional analysis. the idea is this. when a theory is formulated as a collection of
equations, the abstract symbols must be tied to physical features of the world if the theory is to make
contact with reality. in particular, we must introduce a system of units so that if a symbol, say, is
meant  to  refer  to  a  length,  we  have  a  scale  by  which  its  value  can  be  interpreted.  after  all,  if
equations  show  that  the  length  in  question  is  5,  we  need  to  know  if  that  means  5  centimeters,  5
kilometers, or 5 light years, etc. in a theory that involves general relativity and quantum mechanics, a
choice of units emerges naturally, in the following way. there are two constants of nature upon which
general  relativity  depends:  the  speed  of  light, c,  and  newton's  gravitation  constant, g.  quantum
. by examining the units of these constants (e.g., c is a
mechanics depends on one constant of nature 
velocity, so is expressed as distance divided by time, etc.), one can see that the combination  g/c3
has the units of a length; in fact, it is 1.616 × 10-33 centimeters. this is the planck length. since it

5.  for  the  mathematically  inclined  reader,  we  note  that  the  symmetry  principles  used  in
elementary  particle  physics  are  generally  based  on  groups,  most  notably,  lie  groups.  elementary
particles  are  arranged  in  representations  of  various  groups  and  the  equations  governing  their  time
evolution are required to respect the associated symmetry transformations. for the strong force, this
symmetry is called su(3) (the analog of ordinary three-dimensional rotations, but acting on a complex
space), and the three colors of a given quark species transform in a three-dimensional representation.
the shifting (from red, green, blue to yellow, indigo, violet) mentioned in the text is, more precisely,
an su(3) transformation acting on the "color coordinates" of a quark. a gauge symmetry is one in
which the group transformations can have a spacetime dependence: in this case, "rotating" the quark
colors differently at different locations in space and moments in time.

6. during the development of the quantum theories of the three nongravitational forces, physicists
also  came  upon  calculations  that  gave  infinite  results.  in  time,  though,  they  gradually  realized  that
these  infinities  could  be  done  away  with  through  a  tool  known  as renormalization.  the  infinities
arising in attempts to merge general relativity and quantum mechanics are far more severe and are not
amenable  to  the  renormalization  cure.  even  more  recently,  physicists  have  realized  that  infinite
answers are a signal that a theory is being used to analyze a realm that is beyond the bounds of its
applicability. since the goal of current research is to find a theory whose range of applicability is, in
principle,  unbounded—the  "ultimate"  or  "final"  theory—physicists  want  to  find  a  theory  in  which
infinite answers do not crop up, regardless of how extreme the physical system being analyzed might
be.

involves gravitational and spacetime inputs (g and c) and has a quantum mechanical dependence ( )
as well, it sets the scale for measurements—the natural unit of length—in any theory that attempts to
merge general relativity and quantum mechanics. when we use the term "planck length" in the text, it
is often meant in an approximate sense, indicating a length that is within a few orders of magnitude of
10–33 centimeters.

8. currently, in addition to string theory, two other approaches for merging general relativity and
quantum mechanics are being pursued vigorously. one approach is led by roger penrose of oxford
university and is known as twistor theory. the other approach—inspired in part by penrose's work
—is  led  by abhay ashtekar  of  pennsylvania  state  university  and  is  known  as  the new  variables
method. although these other approaches will not be discussed further in this book, there is growing
speculation  that  they  may  have  a  deep  connection  to  string  theory  and  that  possibly,  together  with
string theory, all three approaches are honing in on the same solution for merging general relativity
and quantum mechanics.

chapter 6

1. the expert reader will recognize that this chapter focuses solely on perturbative string theory;

nonperturbative aspects are discussed in chapters 12 and 13.

2. interview with john schwarz, december 23, 1997.
3. similar suggestions were made independently by tamiaki yoneya and by korkut bardakci
and  martin  halpern.  the  swedish  physicist  lars  brink  also  contributed  significantly  to  the  early
development of string theory.

4. interview with john schwarz, december 23, 1997.
5. interview with michael green, december 20, 1997.
6. the standard model does suggest a mechanism by which particles acquire mass—the higgs
mechanism, named after the scottish physicist peter higgs. but from the point of view of explaining
the particle masses, this merely shifts the burden to explaining properties of a hypothetical "mass-
giving particle"—the so-called higgs boson. experimental searches for this particle are underway,
but once again, if it is found and its properties measured, these will be input data for the standard
model, for which the theory offers no explanation.

7.  for  the  mathematically  inclined  reader,  we  note  that  the  association  between  string
vibrational patterns and force charges can be described more precisely as follows. when the motion
of a string is quantized, its possible vibrational states are represented by vectors in a hilbert space,
much as for any quantum-mechanical system. these vectors can be labeled by their eigenvalues under
a  set  of  commuting  hermitian  operators.  among  these  operators  are  the  hamiltonian,  whose
eigenvalues  give  the  energy  and  hence  the  mass  of  the  vibrational  state,  as  well  as  operators
generating  various  gauge  symmetries  that  the  theory  respects.  the  eigenvalues  of  these  latter
operators give the force charges carried by the associated vibrational string state.

8.  based  upon  insights  gleaned  from  the  second  superstring  revolution  (discussed  in  chapter
12),  witten  and,  most  notably,  joe  lykken  of  the  fermi  national  accelerator  laboratory  have
identified a subtle, yet possible, loophole in this conclusion. lykken, exploiting this realization, has
suggested  that  it  might  be  possible  for  strings  to  be  under  far  less  tension,  and  therefore  be
substantially larger in size, than originally thought. so large, in fact, that they might be observable by
the next generation of particle accelerators. if this long-shot possibility turns out to be the case, there
is the exciting prospect that many of the remarkable implications of string theory discussed in this and
the following chapters will be verifiable experimentally within the next decade. but even in the more

"conventional" scenario espoused by string theorists, in which strings are typically on the order of 10-
33 centimeters in length, there are indirect ways to search for them experimentally, as we will discuss
in chapter 9.

9. the expert reader will recognize that the photon produced in a collision between an electron
and a positron is a virtual photon and therefore must shortly relinquish its energy by dissociating into
a particle-antiparticle pair.

10. of course, a camera works by collecting photons that bounce off the object of interest and
recording them on a piece of photographic film. our use of a camera in this example is symbolic,
since we are not imagining bouncing photons off of the colliding strings. rather, we simply want to
record in figure 6.7(c) the whole history of the interaction. having said that, we should point out one
further subtle point that the discussion in the text glosses over. we learned in chapter 4 that we can
formulate  quantum  mechanics  using  feynman's  sum-over-paths  method,  in  which  we  analyze  the
motion  of  objects  by  combining  contributions  from all  possible  trajectories  that  lead  from  some
chosen starting point to some chosen destination (with each trajectory contributing with a statistical
weight  determined  by  feynman).  in  figures  6.6  and  6.7  we  show one  of  the  infinite  number  of
possible trajectories followed by point particles (figure 6.6) or by strings (figure 6.7) taking them
from their initial positions to their final destinations. the discussion in this section, however, applies
equally  well  to  any  of  the  other  possible  trajectories  and  therefore  applies  to  the  whole  quantum-
mechanical process itself. (feynman's formulation of point-particle quantum mechanics in the sum-
over-paths framework was generalized to string theory through the work of stanley mandelstam of the
university of california at berkeley and by the russian physicist alexander polyakov, who is now on
the faculty of the physics department of princeton university.)

chapter 7

3. the discovery and development of supersymmetry has a complicated history. in addition to
those  cited  in  the  text,  essential  early  contributions  were  made  by  r.  haag,  m.  sohnius,  j.  t.
lopuszanski, y. a. gol'fand, e. p. lichtman, j. l. gervais, b. sakita, v. p. akulov, d. v. volkov,
and v. a. soroka, among many others. some of their work is documented in rosanne di stefano,
notes  on  the  conceptual  development  of  supersymmetry,  institute  for  theoretical  physics,  state
university of new york at stony brook, preprint itp-sb-8878.

4. for the mathematically inclined reader we note that this extension involves augmenting the
familiar  cartesian  coordinates  of  spacetime  with  new  quantum  coordinates,  say u  and v,  that  are
anticommuting: u × v =-v × u. supersymmetry can then be thought of as translations in this quantum-
mechanically augmented form of spacetime.

5. for the reader interested in more details of this technical issue we note the following. in note
6 of chapter 6 we mentioned that the standard model invokes a "mass-giving particle"—the higgs
boson—to endow the particles of tables 1.1 and 1.2 with their observed masses. for this procedure
to work, the higgs particle itself cannot be too heavy; studies show that its mass should certainly be
no greater than about 1,000 times the mass of a proton. but it turns out that quantum fluctuations tend
to contribute substantially to the mass of the higgs particle, potentially driving its mass all the way to
the planck scale. theorists have found, however, that this outcome, which would uncover a major

1.  albert  einstein,  as  quoted  in  r.  clark, einstein:  the  life  and  times  (new  york:  avon

2. more precisely, spin-1/2 means that the angular momentum of the electron from its spin is 

books, 1984), p. 287.

/2.

defect  in  the  standard  model,  can  be  avoided  if  certain  parameters  in  the  standard  model  (most
notably, the so-called bare mass of the higgs particle) are finely tuned to better than 1 part in 1015 to
cancel the effects of these quantum fluctuations on the higgs particle's mass.

6. one subtle point to note about figure 7.1 is that the strength of the weak force is shown to be
between  that  of  the  strong  and  electromagnetic  forces,  whereas  we  have  previously  said  that  it  is
weaker than both. the reason for this lies in table 1.2, in which we see that the messenger particles
of  the  weak  force  are  quite  massive,  whereas  those  of  the  strong  and  electromagnetic  forces  are
massless. intrinsically, the strength of the weak force (as measured by its coupling constant—an idea
we will come upon in chapter 12) is as shown in figure 7.1, but its massive messenger particles are
sluggish  conveyers  of  its  influence  and  diminish  its  effects.  in  chapter  14  we  will  see  how  the
gravitational force fits into figure 7.1.

7. edward witten, lecture at the heinz pagels memorial lecture series, aspen, colorado, 1997.
8.  for  an  in-depth  discussion  of  these  and  related  ideas,  see  steven  weinberg, dreams  of  a

final theory.

chapter 8

1. this is a simple idea, but since the imprecision of common language can sometimes lead to
confusion, two clarifying remarks are in order. first, we are assuming that the ant is constrained to
live on the surface of the garden hose. if, on the contrary, the ant could burrow into the interior of the
hose—if it could penetrate into the rubber material of the hose—we would need three numbers to
specify its position, since we would need to also specify how deeply it had burrowed. but if the ant
lives only on the hose's surface, its location can be specified with just two numbers. this leads to our
second point. even with the ant living on the hose's surface, we could, if we so chose, specify its
location with three numbers: the ordinary left-right, back-forth, and up-down positions in our familiar
three-dimensional  space.  but  once  we  know  that  the  ant  lives  on  the  surface  of  the  hose,  the  two
numbers referred to in the text give the minimal data that uniquely specify the ant's position. this is
what we mean by saying that the surface of the hose is two-dimensional.

2. surprisingly, the physicists savas dimopoulos, nima arkani-hamed, and gia dvali, building
on earlier insights of ignatios antoniadis and joseph lykken, have pointed out that even if an extra
curled-up dimension were as large as a millimeter in size, it is possible that it would not yet have
been  detected  experimentally.  the  reason  is  that  particle  accelerators  probe  the  microworld  by
utilizing the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces. the gravitational force, being incredibly feeble
at technologically accessible energies, is generally ignored. but dimopoulos and his collaborators
note  that  if  the  extra  curled-up  dimension  has  an  impact  predominantly  on  the  gravitational  force
(something, it turns out, that is quite plausible in string theory), all extant experiments could well have
overlooked it. new, highly sensitive gravitational experiments will look for such "large" curled-up
dimensions in the near future. a positive result would be one of the greatest discoveries of all time.

3. edwin abbott, flatland (princeton: princeton university press, 1991).
4. a.  einstein  in  letter  to  t.  kaluza  as  quoted  in abraham  pais,  "subtle  is  the  lord":  the

science and the life of albert einstein (oxford: oxford university press, 1982), p. 330.

5. a. einstein in letter to t. kaluza as quoted in d. freedman and p. van nieuwenhuizen, "the

hidden dimensions of spacetime," scientific american 252 (1985), 62.

6. ibid.
7. physicists found that the most difficult feature of the standard model to incorporate through a
higher-dimensional  formulation  is  something  known  as chirality.  so  as  not  to  overburden  the

discussion we have not covered this concept in the main text, but for readers who are interested we
do so briefly here. imagine that someone shows you a film of some particular scientific experiment
and  confronts  you  with  the  unusual  challenge  of  determining  whether  the  film  shot  the  experiment
directly  or  whether  it  shot  the  experiment  by  looking  at  its  reflection  in  a  mirror.  as  the
cinematographer  was  quite  expert,  there  are  no  telltale  signs  of  a  mirror  being  involved.  is  this  a
challenge you can meet? in the mid-1950s, the theoretical insights of t. d. lee and c. n. yang, and
the experimental results of c. s. wu and collaborators, showed that you can meet the challenge, so
long as an appropriate experiment had been filmed. namely, their work established that the laws of
the  universe  are  not  perfectly  mirror  symmetric  in  the  sense  that  the  mirror-reflected  version  of
certain processes—those directly dependent on the weak force—cannot happen in our world, even
though  the  original  process  can. and  so,  as  you  watch  the  film  if  you  see  one  of  these  forbidden
processes occur, you will know that you are watching a mirror-reflected image of the experiment, as
opposed to the experiment itself. since mirrors interchange left and right, the work of lee, yang, and
wu established that the universe is not perfectly left-right symmetric—in the language of the field, the
universe  is chiral.  it  is  this  feature  of  the  standard  model  (the  weak  force,  in  particular)  that
physicists found nearly impossible to incorporate into a higher-dimensional supergravity framework.
to avoid confusion, we note that in chapter 10 we will discuss a concept in string theory known as
"mirror symmetry," but the use of the word "mirror" in that context is completely different from its use
here.

8.  for  the  mathematically  inclined  reader,  we  note  that  a  calabi-yau  manifold  is  a  complex
kähler  manifold  with  vanishing  first  chern  class.  in  1957  calabi  conjectured  that  every  such
manifold admits a ricci-flat metric, and in 1977 yau proved this to be true.

9. this illustration is courtesy of andrew hanson of indiana university, and was made using the

mathematica 3-d graphing package.

10. for the mathematically inclined reader we note that this particular calabi-yau space is a

real three-dimensional slice through the quintic hypersurface in complex projective four-space.

1. edward witten, "reflections on the fate of spacetime" physics today, april 1996, p. 24.
2. interview with edward witten, may 11, 1998.
3.  sheldon  glashow  and  paul  ginsparg,  "desperately  seeking  superstrings?" physics  today,

chapter 9

may 1986, p. 7.

4. sheldon glashow, in the superworld i, ed. a. zichichi (new york: plenum, 1990), p. 250.
5. sheldon glashow, interactions (new york: warner books, 1988), p. 335.
6.  richard  feynman,  in superstrings:  a  theory  of  everything?  ed.  paul  davies  and  julian

brown (cambridge, eng: cambridge university press, 1988).

7.  howard  georgi,  in the new physics,  ed.  paul  davies  (cambridge:  cambridge  university

press 1989), p. 446.

8. interview with edward witten, march 4, 1998.
9. interview with cumrun vafa, january 12, 1998.
10.  murray  gell-mann,  as  quoted  in  robert  p.  crease  and  charles  c.  mann, the  second

creation (new brunswick, n.j.: rutgers university press), 1996, p. 414.

11. interview with sheldon glashow, december 28, 1997.
12. interview with sheldon glashow, december 28, 1997.
13.  interview  with  howard  georgi,  december  28,  1997.  during  the  interview,  georgi  also

noted  that  the  experimental  refutation  of  the  prediction  of  proton  decay  that  emerged  from  his  and
glashow's  first  proposed  grand  unified  theory  (see  chapter  7)  played  a  significant  part  in  his
reluctance to embrace superstring theory. he noted poignantly that his grand unified theory invoked a
vastly  higher  energy  realm  than  any  theory  previously  considered,  and  when  its  prediction  was
proved wrong—when it resulted in his "being slapped down by nature"—his attitude toward studying
extremely  high  energy  physics  abruptly  changed.  when  i  asked  him  whether  experimental
confirmation  of  his  grand  unified  theory  might  have  inspired  him  to  lead  the  charge  to  the  planck
scale, he responded, "yes, it likely would have."

14.  david  gross,  "superstrings  and  unification,"  in proceedings  of  the  xxiv  international
conference on high energy physics, ed. r. kotthaus and j. kühn (berlin: springer-verlag, 1988),
p. 329.

15. having said this, it's worth bearing in mind the long-shot possibility, pointed out in endnote
8  of  chapter  6,  that  strings  just might  be  significantly  longer  than  originally  thought  and  therefore
might be subject to direct experimental observation by accelerators within a few decades.

16. for the mathematically inclined reader we note that the more precise mathematical statement
is that the number of families is half the absolute value of the euler number of the calabi-yau space.
the euler number itself is the alternating sum of the dimensions of the manifold's homology groups—
the latter being what we loosely refer to as multidimensional holes. so, three families emerge from
calabi-yau spaces whose euler number is ±6.

17. interview with john schwarz, december 23, 1997.
18.  for  the  mathematically  inclined  reader  we  note  that  we  are  referring  to  calabi-yau
manifolds with a finite, nontrivial fundamental group, the order of which, in certain cases, determines
the fractional charge denominators.

19. interview with edward witten, march 4, 1998.
20. for the expert we note that some of these processes violate lepton number conservation as

well as charge-parity-time (cpt) reversal symmetry.

chapter 10

1. for completeness, we note that although much of what we have covered to this point in the
book applies equally well to open strings (a string with loose ends) or closed-string loops (the strings
on which we have focused), the topic discussed here is one in which the two kinds of strings would
appear to have different properties. after all, an open string will not get entangled by looping around
a  circular  dimension.  nevertheless,  through  work  that  ultimately  has  played  a  pivotal  part  in  the
second  superstring  revolution,  in  1989  joe  polchinski  from  the  university  of  california  at  santa
barbara  and  two  of  his  students,  jian-hui  dai  and  robert  leigh,  showed  how  open  strings  fit
perfectly into the conclusions we find in this chapter.

2. in case you are wondering why the possible uniform vibrational energies are whole number
multiples of 1/r, you need only think back to the discussion of quantum mechanics—the warehouse in
particular—from  chapter  4.  there  we  learned  that  quantum  mechanics  implies  that  energy,  like
money,  comes  in  discrete  lumps:  whole  number  multiples  of  various  energy  denominations.  in  the
case of uniform vibrational string motion in the garden-hose universe, this energy denomination is
precisely  1/r,  as  we  demonstrated  in  the  text  using  the  uncertainty  principle.  thus  the  uniform
vibrational energies are whole number multiples of 1/r.

3.  mathematically,  the  identity  between  the  string  energies  in  a  universe  with  a  circular
dimension whose radius is either r or 1/r arises from the fact that the energies are of the form v/r +

wr, where v is the vibration number and w is the winding number. this equation is invariant under the
simultaneous  interchange  of v  and w  as  well  as r and 1/r—i.e., under the interchange of vibration
and winding numbers and inversion of the radius. in our discussion we are working in planck units,
but we can work in more conventional units by rewriting the energy formula in terms of  —the so-
called string scale—whose value is about the planck length, 10-33 centimeter. we can then express
string energies as v/r + wr/
/r,
where the latter two are now expressed in terms of conventional units of distance.

, which is invariant under interchange of v and w as well as r and 

4. you  may  be  wondering  how  it's  possible  for  a  string  that  stretches  all  the  way  around  a
circular dimension of radius r to nevertheless measure the radius to be 1/r. although a thoroughly
justifiable concern, its resolution actually lies in the imprecise phrasing of the question itself. you
see, when we say that the string is wrapped around a circle of radius r, we are by necessity invoking
a definition of distance (so that the phrase "radius r" has meaning). but this definition of distance is
the one relevant for the unwound string modes—that is, the vibration modes. from the point of view
of this definition of distance—and only this definition—the winding string configurations appear to
stretch around the circular part of space. however, from the second definition of distance, the one that
caters to the wound-string configurations, they are every bit as localized in space as are the vibration
modes  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  first  definition  of  distance,  and  the  radius  they  "see"  is  1/r,  as
discussed in the text. this description gives some sense of why wound and unwound strings measure
distances that are inversely related. but as the point is quite subtle, it is perhaps worth noting the
underlying  technical  analysis  for  the  mathematically  inclined  reader.  in  ordinary  point-particle
quantum  mechanics,  distance  and  momentum  (essentially  energy)  are  related  by  fourier  transform.
that is, a position eigenstate |x> on a circle of radius r can be defined by |x>= veixp|p>  where p =
v/r and |p> is a momentum eigenstate (the direct analog of what we have called a uniform-vibration
mode of a string—overall motion without change in shape). in string theory, though, there is a second
notion of position eigenstate | > defined by making use of the winding string states: | >=  we
| >
 = wr. from these definitions we immediately see that x is
where | > is a winding eigenstate with 
  is  periodic  with  period  2 /r,  showing  that x  is  a  position
periodic  with  period  2 r  while 
coordinate on a circle of radius r while 
 is the position coordinate on a circle of radius 1/r. even
more explicitly, we can now imagine taking the two wavepackets |x> and | >, both starting say, at the
origin,  and  allowing  them  to  evolve  in  time  to  carry  out  our  operational  approach  for  defining
distance. the radius of the circle, as measured by either probe, is then proportional to the required
time lapse for the packet to return to its initial configuration. since a state with energy e evolves with
a phase factor involving et, we see that the time lapse, and hence the radius, is t ~ 1/e ~ r for the
vibration modes and t ~ 1/e ~1/r for the winding modes.

5. for the mathematically inclined reader, we note that, more precisely, the number of families
of string vibrations is one-half the absolute value of the euler characteristic of the calabi-yau space,
as mentioned in note 16 of chapter 9. this is given by the absolute value of difference  between h2,1
and h1,1, where hp,q denotes the (p,q) hodge number. up to a numerical shift, these count the number
of nontrivial homology three-cycles  ("three-dimensional  holes")  and  the  number  of  homology  two-
cycles ("two-dimensional holes"). and so, whereas we speak of the total number of holes in the main
text, the more precise analysis shows that the number of families depends on the absolute value of
difference between the odd-and even-dimensional holes. the conclusion, however, is the same. for
instance, if two calabi-yau spaces differ by the interchange of their respective h2,1  and h1,1 hodge
numbers, the number of particle families—and the total number of "holes"—will not change.

6. the name comes from the fact that the "hodge diamonds"—a mathematical summary of the
holes of various dimensions in a calabi-yau space—for each calabi-yau space of a mirror pair are
mirror reflections of one another.

7. the term mirror symmetry is also used in other, completely different contexts in physics, such
as in the question of chirality—that is, whether the universe is left-right symmetric—as discussed in
note 7 of chapter 8.

chapter 11

1. the mathematically inclined reader will recognize that we are asking whether the topology of
space  is  dynamical—that  is,  whether  it  can  change.  we  note  that  although  we  will  often  use  the
language  of  dynamical  topology  change,  in  practice  we  are  usually  considering  a  one-parameter
family  of spacetimes whose topology changes as a function of the parameter. technically speaking,
this parameter is not time, but in certain limits can essentially be identified with time.

2. for the mathematically inclined reader, the procedure involves blowing down rational curves
on  a  calabi-yau  manifold  and  then  making  use  of  the  fact  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  the
resulting singularity can be repaired by distinct small resolutions.

3. k. c. cole, new york times magazine, october 18, 1987, p. 20.

chapter 12

1. albert einstein, as quoted in john d. barrow, theories of everything (new york: fawcett-

columbine, 1992), p. 13.

2. let's briefly summarize the differences between the five string theories. to do so, we note that
vibrational disturbances along a loop of string can travel clockwise or counterclockwise. the type
iia  and  type  iib  strings  differ  in  that  in  the  latter  theory,  these  clockwise/counterclockwise
vibrations  are  identical,  while  in  the  former,  they  are  exactly  opposite  in  form. opposite  has  a
precise mathematical meaning in this context, but it's easiest to think about in terms of the spins of the
resulting vibrational patterns in each theory. in the type iib theory, it turns out that all particles spin
in the same direction (they have the same chirality), whereas in the type iia theory, they spin in both
directions  (they  have  both  chiralities).  nevertheless,  each  theory  incorporates  supersymmetry.  the
two  heterotic  theories  differ  in  a  similar  but  more  dramatic  way.  each  of  their  clockwise  string
vibrations looks like those of the type ii string (when focusing on just the clockwise vibrations, the
type iia and type iib theories are the same), but their counterclockwise vibrations are those of the
original bosonic string theory. although the bosonic string has insurmountable problems when chosen
for  both  clockwise  and  counterclockwise  string  vibrations,  in  1985  david  gross,  jeffrey  harvey,
emil martinec, and ryan rhom (all then at princeton university and dubbed the "princeton string
quartet") showed that a perfectly sensible theory emerges if it is used in combination with the type ii
string.  the  really  odd  feature  of  this  union  is  that  it  has  been  known  since  the  work  of  claude
lovelace of rutgers university in 1971 and the work of richard brower of boston university, peter
goddard of cambridge university, and charles thorn of the university of florida at gainesville in
1972  that  the  bosonic  string  requires  a  26-dimensional  spacetime,  whereas  the  superstring,  as  we
have  discussed,  requires  a  10-dimensional  one.  so  the  heterotic  string  constructions  are  a  strange
hybrid—a heterosis—in  which  counterclockwise  vibrational  patterns  live  in  26  dimensions  and
clockwise patterns live in 10 dimensions! before you get caught up in trying to make sense of this
perplexing union, gross and his collaborators showed that the extra 16 dimensions on the bosonic
side must be curled up into one of two very special higher-dimensional doughnutlike shapes, giving

rise to the heterotic-o and heterotic-e theories. since the extra 16 dimensions on the bosonic side
are rigidly curled up, each of these theories behaves as though it really has 10 dimensions, just as in
the type ii case. again, both heterotic theories incorporate a version of supersymmetry. finally, the
type i theory is a close cousin of the type iib string except that, in addition to the closed loops of
string we have discussed in previous chapters, it also has strings with unconnected ends—so-called
open strings.

3. when we speak of "exact" answers in this chapter, such as the "exact" motion of the earth,
what  we  really  mean  is  the  exact  prediction  for  some  physical  quantity within  some  chosen
theoretical framework. until we truly have the final theory—perhaps we now do, perhaps we never
will—all of our theories will themselves be approximations to reality. but this notion of approximate
has nothing to do with our discussion in this chapter. here we are concerned with the fact that within
a chosen theory, it is often difficult, if not impossible, to extract the exact predictions that the theory
makes.  instead,  we  have  to  extract  such  predictions  using  approximation  methods  based  on  a
perturbative approach.

4. these diagrams are string theory versions of the so-called feynman diagrams, invented by

richard feynman for performing perturbative calculations in point-particle quantum field theory.

5. more precisely, every virtual string pair, that is, every loop in a given diagram, contributes—
among other more complicated terms—a multiplicative factor of the string coupling constant. more
loops translate into more factors of the string coupling constant. if the string coupling constant is less
than  1,  repeated  multiplications  make  the  overall  contribution  ever  smaller;  if  it  is  1  or  larger,
repeated multiplications yield a contribution with the same or larger magnitude.

6. for the mathematically inclined reader, we note that the equation states that spacetime must
admit  a  ricci-flat  metric.  if  we  split  spacetime  into  a  cartesian  product  of  four-dimensional
minkowski spacetime and a six-dimensional compact kähler space, ricci-flatness is equivalent to
the latter being a calabi-yau manifold. this is why calabi-yau spaces play such a prominent role in
string theory.

7.  of  course,  nothing  absolutely  ensures  that  these  indirect  approaches  are  justified.  for
example,  just  as  some  faces  are  not  left-right  symmetric,  it might  be  that  the  laws  of  physics  are
different in other far-flung regions of the universe, as we will discuss briefly in chapter 14.

8. the expert reader will recognize that these statements require so-called n=2 supersymmetry.
9. to be a little more precise, if we call the heterotic-o coupling constant gho and the type i
coupling  constant gi,  then  the  relation  between  the  two  theories  states  that  they  are  physically
identical so long as gho = 1/gi, which is equivalent to gi = 1/gho. when one coupling constant is big
the other is small.

10. this is a close analog of the r, 1/r duality discussed previously. if we call the type iib
string coupling constant giib then the statement that appears to be true is that the values giib and 1/giib
describe the same physics. if giib is big, 1/giib is small, and vice versa.

11. if all but four dimensions are curled up, a theory with more than eleven total dimensions
necessarily gives rise to massless particles with spin greater than 2, something that both theoretical
and experimental considerations rule out.

12. a  notable  exception  is  the  important  1987  work  of  duff,  paul  howe,  takeo  inami,  and
kelley stelle in which they drew on earlier insights of eric bergshoeff, ergin sezgin, and townsend
to argue that ten-dimensional string theory should have a deep eleven-dimensional connection.

13. more precisely, this diagram should be interpreted as saying that we have a single theory

that  depends  on  a  number  of  parameters.  the  parameters  include  coupling  constants  as  well  as
geometrical size and shape parameters. in principle, we should be able to use the theory to calculate
particular  values  for  all  of  these  parameters—a  particular  value  for  its  coupling  constant  and  a
particular form for the spacetime geometry—but within our current theoretical understanding, we do
not know how to accomplish this. and so, to understand the theory better string theorists study its
properties as the values of these parameters are varied over all possibilities. if the parameter values
are chosen to lie in any of the six peninsular regions of figure 12.11, the theory has the properties
inherent to one of the five string theories, or to eleven-dimensional supergravity, as marked. if the
parameter  values  are  chosen  to  lie  in  the  central  region,  the  physics  is  governed  by  the  still
mysterious m-theory.

14. we should note, though, that even in the peninsular regions there are some exotic ways in
which branes can have an effect on familiar physics. for example, it has been suggested that our three
extended spatial dimensions might themselves be a three-brane that is large and unfurled. if so, as we
go  about  our  daily  business  we  would  be  gliding  through  the  interior  of  a  three-dimensional
membrane. investigations of such possibilities are now being undertaken.

15. interview with edward witten, may 11, 1998.

chapter 13

1. the expert reader will recognize that under mirror symmetry, a collapsing three-dimensional
sphere on one calabi-yau space gets mapped to a collapsing two-dimensional sphere on the mirror
calabi-yau space—apparently putting us back in the situation of flops discussed in chapter 11. the
difference, however, is that a mirror rephrasing of this sort results in the antisymmetric tensor field
bµv—the real part of the complexified kähler form on the mirror calabi-yau space—vanishing, and
this is a far more drastic sort of singularity than that discussed in chapter 11.

2.  more  precisely,  these  are  examples  of extremal  black  holes:  black  holes  that  have  the
minimum mass consistent with the force charges they carry, just like the bps states in chapter 12.
similar black holes will also play a pivotal role in the following discussion on black hole entropy.

3. the radiation emitted from a black hole should be just like that emitted from a hot oven—the
very problem, discussed at the outset of chapter 4, that played such a pivotal role in the development
of quantum mechanics.

4.  it  turns  out  that  because  the  black  holes  involved  in  space-tearing  conifold  transitions  are

extremal, they do not hawking radiate, regardless of how light they become.

5. stephen hawking, lecture at amsterdam symposium on gravity, black holes, and strings,

june 21, 1996.

6. in their initial calculation, strominger and vafa found that the mathematics was made easier
by working with five—not four—extended spacetime dimensions. surprisingly, after completing their
calculation of the entropy of such a five-dimensional black hole they realized that no theoretician had
as yet constructed such hypothetical extremal black holes in the setting of five-dimensional general
relativity. since only by comparing their answer to the area of the event horizon of such a hypothetical
black  hole  could  they  confirm  their  results,  strominger  and  vafa  then  set  out  to  mathematically
construct such a five-dimensional black hole. they succeeded. it was then a simple matter to show
that the microscopic string theory calculation of the entropy was in agreement with what hawking
would  have  predicted  based  on  the  area  of  the  black  hole's  event  horizon.  but  it  is  interesting  to
realize that because the black hole solution was found later, strominger and vafa did not know the
answer  they  were  shooting  for  while  undertaking  their  entropy  calculation.  since  their  work,

verlag, 1995).

princeton university press, 1995), p. 41.

strings, june 21, 1997.

9. stephen hawking, in hawking and roger penrose, the nature of space and time (princeton:

10.  stephen  hawking,  lecture  at  the  amsterdam  symposium  on  gravity,  black  holes,  and

numerous  researchers,  led  most  notably  by  princeton  physicist  curtis  callan,  have  succeeded  in
extending the entropy calculations to the more familiar setting of four extended spacetime dimensions,
and all are in agreement with hawking's predictions.

7. interview with sheldon glashow, december 29, 1997.
8. laplace, philosophical essay on probabilities, trans. andrew i. dale (new york: springer-

11. interview with andrew strominger, december 29, 1997.
12. interview with cumrun vafa, january 12, 1998.
13.  stephen  hawking,  lecture  at  the  amsterdam  symposium  on  gravity,  black  holes,  and

strings, june 21, 1997.

14. this issue also has some bearing on the information-loss question, as some physicists have
speculated over the years that there might be a central "nugget" embedded in the depths of a black
hole that stores all of the information carried by matter that gets trapped within the hole's horizon.

15. in fact, the space-tearing conifold transitions discussed in this chapter involve black holes
and hence might seem to be tied up with the question of their singularities. but recall that the conifold
tear  occurs  just  as  the  black  hole  has  shed  all  its  mass,  and  is  therefore  not  directly  related  to
questions concerning black hole singularities.

chapter 14

1.  more  precisely,  the  universe  should  be  filled  with  photons  conforming  to  the  radiation
thermally emitted by a perfectly absorbent body—a "black-body" in the language of thermodynamics
—with  the  stated  temperature  range.  this  is  the  same  radiation  spectrum  emitted  quantum
mechanically by black holes, as explained by hawking, and by a hot oven, as explained by planck.

2. the discussion conveys the spirit of the issues involved although we are glossing over some
subtle features having to do with the motion of light in an expanding universe that affect the detailed
numerics.  in  particular,  although  special  relativity  declares  that  nothing  can  travel  faster  than  the
speed of light, this does not preclude two photons carried along on the expanding spatial fabric from
receeding from one another at a speed exceeding that of light. for example, at the time the universe
first became transparent, about 300,000 years atb, locations in the heavens that were about 900,000
light-years  apart  would  have  been  able  to  have  influenced  each  other,  even  though  the  distance
between them exceeds 300,000 light-years. the extra factor of three comes from the expansion of the
spatial fabric. this means that as we run the cosmic film backward in time, by the time we get to
300,000 years atb, two points in the heavens need only be less than 900,000 light-years apart to
have had a chance to influence each other's temperature. these detailed numerics do not change the
qualitative features of the issues discussed.

3. for a detailed and lively discussion of the discovery of the inflationary cosmological model
and the problems it resolves, see alan guth, the inflationary universe (reading, mass: addison-
wesley, 1997).

4. for the mathematically inclined reader, we note that the idea underlying this conclusion is the
following: if the sum of the spacetime dimensions of the paths swept out by each of two objects is
greater than or equal to the spacetime dimension of the arena through which they are moving then they

will generically intersect. for instance, point particles sweep out one-dimensional spacetime paths—
the  sum  of  the  spacetime  dimensions  for  two  such  particle  paths  is  therefore  two.  the  spacetime
dimension  of  lineland  is  also  two,  and  hence  their  paths  will  generally  intersect  (assuming  their
velocities  have  not  been  finely  tuned  to  be  exactly  equal).  similarly,  strings  sweep  out  two-
dimensional  spacetime  paths  (their  world-sheets);  for  two  strings  the  sum  in  question  is  therefore
four. this means that strings moving in four spacetime dimensions (three space and one time) will
generally intersect.

5. with the discovery of m-theory and the recognition of an eleventh dimension, string theorists
have begun studying ways of curling up all seven extra dimensions in a manner that puts them all on
more or less equal footing. the possible choices for such seven-dimensional manifolds are known as
joyce manifolds, after domenic joyce of oxford university, who is credited with finding the first
techniques for their mathematical construction.

6. interview with cumrun vafa, january 12, 1998.
7. the expert reader will note that our description is taking place in the so-called string frame of
reference,  in  which  increasing  curvature  during  the  pre–big  bang  arises  from  (a  dilaton-driven)
increase in the strength of the gravitational force. in the so-called einstein frame, the evolution would
be described as an accelerating contraction phase.

8. interview with gabriele veneziano, may 19, 1998.
9.  smolin's  ideas  are  discussed  in  his  book the  life  of  the  cosmos  (new  york:  oxford

university press, 1997).

10.  within  string  theory,  for  example,  this  evolution  could  be  driven  by  small  changes  to  the
shape  of  the  curled-up  dimensions  from  one  universe  to  its  offspring.  from  our  results  on  space-
tearing conifold transitions, we know that a sufficiently long sequence of such small changes can take
us from one calabi-yau to any other, allowing the multiverse to sample the reproductive efficiency of
all  universes  based  on  strings. after  the  multiverse  has  passed  through  sufficiently  many  stages  of
reproduction,  smolin's  hypothesis  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  the  typical  universe  will  have  a
calabi-yau component that is optimized for fertility.

chapter 15
1. interview with edward witten, march 4, 1998.
2. some theorists see a hint of this idea in the holographic principle, a concept originated by
susskind  and  the  renowned  dutch  physicist  gerard  't  hooft.  just  as  a  hologram  can  reproduce  a
three-dimensional  visual  image  from  a  specially  designed two-dimensional  film,  susskind  and  't
hooft have suggested that all of the physical happenings we encounter may actually be encoded fully
through equations defined in a lower-dimensional world. although this may sound as strange as trying
to draw someone's portrait by viewing only their shadow, we can get a sense of what it means, and
understand  part  of  susskind's  and  't  hooft's  motivation,  by  thinking  about  black  hole  entropy  as
discussed in chapter 13. recall that the entropy of a black hole is determined by the surface area of
its event horizon—and not by the total volume of space that the event horizon bounds. therefore, the
disorder  of  a  black  hole,  and  correspondingly  the  information  it  can  embody,  is  encoded  in  the
two-dimensional data of surface area. it is almost as if the event horizon of the black hole acts like a
hologram  by  capturing  all  the  information  content  of  the  black  hole's  three-dimensional  interior.
susskind and 't hooft have generalized this idea to the whole universe by suggesting that everything
that occurs in the "interior" of the universe is merely a reflection of data and equations defined on a
distant,  bounding  surface.  recently,  work  by  the  harvard  physicist  juan  maldacena,  together  with

important subsequent work by witten and of princeton physicists steven gubser, igor klebanov, and
alexander  polyakov,  has  shown  that,  at  least  in  certain  cases, string  theory  embodies  the
holographic principle. in a manner that is currently being investigated vigorously, it appears that the
physics  of  a  universe  governed  by  string  theory  has  an  equivalent  description  that  involves  only
physics that takes place on such a bounding surface—a surface necessarily of lower dimensionality
than  the  interior.  some  string  theorists  have  suggested  that  fully  understanding  the  holographic
principle and its role in string theory may well lead to the third superstring revolution.

3. sir isaac newton's mathematical principles of natural philosophy and his system of the

world, trans. motte and cajori (berkeley: university of california press, 1962), vol. i, p. 6.

4.  if  you  are  familiar  with  linear  algebra,  one  simple  and  relevant  way  of  thinking  about
noncommutative  geometry  is  to  replace  conventional  cartesian  coordinates,  which  commute  under
multiplication, with matrices, which do not.

5. interview with cumrun vafa, january 12, 1998.
6. interview with edward witten, may 11, 1998.
7.  quoted  in  banesh  hoffman  with  helen  dukas, albert  einstein,  creator  and  rebel  (new

8. martin j. klein, "einstein: the life and times, by r. w. clark," (book review)  science 174,

york: viking, 1972), p. 18.

pp. 1315–16.

9. jacob bronkowski, the ascent of man (boston: little, brown, 1973), p. 20.

glossary of scientific terms

absolute zero.  the  lowest  possible  temperature,  about  -273  degrees  celsius,  or  0  on  the  kelvin
scale.
acceleration. a change in an object's speed or direction. see also velocity.
accelerator. see particle accelerator.
amplitude. the maximum height of a wave peak or the maximum depth of a wave trough.
anthropic  principle.  doctrine  that  one  explanation  for  why  the  universe  has  the  properties  we
observe is that, were the properties different, it is likely that life would not form and therefore we
would not be here to observe the changes.
antimatter.  matter  that  has  the  same  gravitational  properties  as  ordinary  matter,  but  that  has  an
opposite electric charge as well as opposite nuclear force charges.
antiparticle. a particle of antimatter.
atb. acronym for "after the bang"; usually used in reference to time elapsed since the big bang.
atom.  fundamental  building  block  of  matter,  consisting  of  a nucleus  (comprising protons  and
neutrons) and an orbiting swarm of electrons.
big bang.  currently  accepted  theory  that  the  expanding  universe  began  some  15  billion  years  ago
from a state of enormous energy, density, and compression.
big crunch. one hypothesized future for the universe in which the current expansion stops, reverses,
and results in all space and all matter collapsing together; a reversal of the big bang.
black hole. an object whose immense gravitational field entraps anything, even light, that gets too
close (closer than the black hole's event horizon).
black-hole entropy the entropy embodied within a black hole.
boson. a particle, or pattern of string vibration, with a whole number amount of spin; typically a
messenger particle.
bosonic string theory. first known string theory; contains vibrational patterns that are all bosons.
bps states. configurations in a supersymmetric theory whose properties can be determined exactly
by arguments rooted in symmetry.
brane. any of the extended objects that arise in string theory. a one-brane is a string, a two-brane
is a membrane, a three-brane has three extended dimensions, etc. more generally, a p-brane  has p
spatial dimensions.
calabi-yau  space,  calabi-yau  shape.   a  space  (shape)  into  which  the  extra  spatial  dimensions
required by string theory can be curled up, consistent with the equations of the theory.

charge. see force charge.
chiral, chirality. feature of fundamental particle physics that distinguishes left-from right-handed,
showing that the universe is not fully left-right symmetric.
closed string. a type of string that is in the shape of a loop.
conifold transition. evolution of the calabi-yau portion of space in which its fabric rips and repairs
itself, yet with mild and acceptable physical consequences in the context of string theory. the tears
involved are more severe than those in a flop transition.
cosmic microwave  background  radiation.  microwave  radiation  suffusing  the  universe,  produced
during the big bang and subsequently thinned and cooled as the universe expanded.
cosmological  constant.  a  modification  of general  relativity's  original  equations,  allowing  for  a
static universe; interpretable as a constant energy density of the vacuum.
coupling constant. see string coupling constant.
curled-up dimension. a spatial dimension that does not have an observably large spatial extent; a
spatial  dimension  that  is  crumpled,  wrapped,  or  curled  up  into  a  tiny  size,  thereby  evading  direct
detection.
curvature. the deviation of an object or of space or of spacetime  from  a flat form and therefore
from the rules of geometry codified by euclid.
dimension. an independent axis or direction in space or spacetime. the familiar space around us has
three dimensions (left-right, back-forth, up-down) and the familiar spacetime has four (the previous
three  axes  plus  the  past-future  axis). superstring  theory  requires  the  universe  to  have  additional
spatial dimensions.
dual, duality, duality symmetries. situation in which two or more theories appear to be completely
different, yet actually give rise to identical physical consequences.
electromagnetic field. force field of the electromagnetic force, consisting of electric and magnetic
lines of force at each point in space.
electromagnetic  force.  one  of  the  four  fundamental  forces,  a  union  of  the  electric  and  magnetic
forces.
electromagnetic gauge symmetry. gauge symmetry underlying quantum electrodynamics.
electromagnetic radiation. the energy carried by an electromagnetic wave.
electromagnetic wave. a wavelike disturbance in an electromagnetic field; all such waves travel
at the speed of light. visible light, x rays, microwaves, and infrared radiation are examples.
electron. negatively charged particle, typically found orbiting the nucleus of an atom.
electroweak  theory.  relativistic  quantum  field  theory  describing 
electromagnetic force in one unified framework.
eleven-dimensional supergravity. promising higher-dimensional supergravity theory developed in
the 1970s, subsequently ignored, and more recently shown to be an important part of string theory.
entropy.  a  measure  of  the  disorder  of  a  physical  system;  the  number  of  rearrangements  of  the

the weak  force  and  the

ingredients of a system that leave its overall appearance intact.
equivalence principle. see principle of equivalence.
event horizon. the one-way surface of a black hole; once penetrated, the laws of gravity ensure that
there is no turning back, no escaping the powerful gravitational grip of the black hole.
extended  dimension.  a  space  (and spacetime)  dimension  that  is  large  and  directly  apparent;  a
dimension with which we are ordinarily familiar, as opposed to a curled-up dimension.
extremal black holes. black holes endowed with the maximal amount of force charge possible for a
given total mass.
families. organization of matter particles into three groups, with each group being known as a family.
the particles in each successive family differ from those in the previous by being heavier, but carry
the same electric and nuclear force charges.
fermion. a particle, or pattern of string vibration, with half a whole odd number amount of spin;
typically a matter particle.
feynman sum-over-paths. see sum-over-paths.
field, force field.  from  a macroscopic perspective, the means by which a force communicates its
influence; described by a collection of numbers at each point in space that reflect the strength and
direction of the force at that point.
flat.  subject  to  the  rules  of  geometry  codified  by  euclid;  a  shape,  like  the  surface  of  a  perfectly
smooth tabletop, and its higher-dimensional generalizations.
flop transition.  evolution  of  the calabi-yau portion of space in which its fabric rips and repairs
itself, yet with mild and acceptable physical consequences in the context of string theory.
foam. see spacetime foam.
force charge. a property of a particle that determines how it responds to a particular force. for
instance, the electric charge of a particle determines how it responds to the electromagnetic force.
frequency. the number of complete wave cycles a wave completes each second.
gauge symmetry. symmetry principle underlying the quantum-mechanical description of the three
nongravitational  forces;  the  symmetry  involves  the  invariance  of  a  physical  system  under  various
shifts in the values of force charges, shifts that can change from place to place and from moment to
moment.
general relativity. einstein's formulation of gravity, which shows that space and time communicate
the gravitational force through their curvature.
gluon. smallest bundle of the strong force field; messenger particle of the strong force.
grand  unification.  class  of  theories  that  merge  all  three  nongravitational  forces  into  a  single
theoretical framework.
gravitational force. the weakest of the four fundamental forces of nature. described by newton's
universal theory of gravity, and subsequently by einstein's general relativity.
graviton. smallest bundle of the gravitational force field; messenger particle for the gravitational
force.

heterotic-e string theory (heterotic e8 × e8 string theory). one of the five superstring theories;
involves  closed  strings  whose  right-moving  vibrations  resemble  those  of  the type  ii  string  and
whose  left-moving  vibrations  involve  those  of  the bosonic  string.  differs  in  important  but  subtle
ways from the heterotic-o string theory.
heterotic-o string theory (heterotic o(32) string theory). one of the five superstring theories;
involves  closed  strings  whose  right-moving  vibrations  resemble  those  of  the type  ii  string  and
whose  left-moving  vibrations  involve  those  of  the bosonic  string.  differs  in  important  but  subtle
ways from the heterotic-e string theory.
higher-dimensional  supergravity.  class  of supergravity  theories  in  more  than  four spacetime
dimensions.
horizon problem. cosmological puzzle associated with the fact that regions of the universe that are
separated  by  vast  distances  nevertheless  have  nearly  identical  properties  such  as  temperature.
inflationary cosmology offers a solution.
infinities. typical nonsensical answer emerging from calculations that involve general relativity and
quantum mechanics in a point-particle framework.
inflation, inflationary cosmology.  modification  to  the  earliest  moments  of  the  standard big  bang
cosmology in which universe undergoes a brief burst of enormous expansion.
initial conditions. data describing the beginning state of a physical system.
interference pattern. wave pattern that emerges from the overlap and the intermingling of waves
emitted from different locations.
kaluza-klein  theory.  class  of  theories  incorporating  extra curled-up  dimensions,  together  with
quantum mechanics.
kelvin. a temperature scale in which temperatures are quoted relative to absolute zero.
klein-gordon equation. a fundamental equation of relativistic quantum field theory.
laplacian determinism. clockwork conception of the universe in which complete knowledge of the
state of the universe at one moment completely determines its state at all future and past moments.
light clock. a hypothetical clock that measures elapsed time by counting the number of round-trip
journeys completed by a single photon between two mirrors.
lorentz contraction.  feature  emerging  from special relativity, in which a moving object appears
shortened along its direction of motion.
macroscopic. refers to scales typically encountered in the everyday world and larger; roughly the
opposite of microscopic.
massless  black  hole.  in  string  theory,  a  particular  kind  of black  hole  that  may  have  large  mass
initially, but that becomes ever lighter as a piece of the calabi-yau portion of space shrinks. when
the portion of space has shrunk down to a point, the initially massive black hole has no remaining
mass—it is massless. in this state, it no longer manifests such usual black hole properties as an event
horizon.
maxwell's  theory,  maxwell's  electromagnetic  theory.  theory  uniting  electricity  and  magnetism,

based  on  the  concept  of  the electromagnetic  field,  devised  by  maxwell  in  the  1880s;  shows  that
visible light is an example of an electromagnetic wave.
messenger particle. smallest bundle of a force field; microscopic conveyer of a force.
mirror symmetry. in the context of string theory, a symmetry showing that two different calabi-yau
shapes,  known  as  a  mirror  pair,  give  rise  to  identical  physics  when  chosen  for  the curled-up
dimensions of string theory.
m-theory.  theory  emerging  from  the second  superstring  revolution  that  unites  the  previous  five
superstring  theories  within  a  single  overarching  framework.  m-theory  appears  to  be  a  theory
involving  eleven spacetime  dimensions,  although  many  of  its  detailed  properties  have  yet  to  be
understood.
multidimensional  hole.  a  generalization  of  the  hole  found  in  a  doughnut  to  higher-dimensional
versions.
multi-doughnut, multi-handled doughnut. a generalization of a doughnut shape (a torus) that has
more than one hole.
multiverse. hypothetical enlargement of the cosmos in which our universe is but one of an enormous
number of separate and distinct universes.
neutrino. electrically neutral particle, subject only to the weak force.
neutron. electrically neutral particle, typically found in the nucleus of an atom, consisting of three
quarks (two down-quarks, one up-quark).
newton's  laws  of  motion.  laws  describing  the  motion  of  bodies  based  on  the  conception  of  an
absolute and immutable space and time; these laws held sway until einstein's discovery of special
relativity.
newton's  universal  theory  of  gravity.  theory  of  gravity  declaring  that  the  force  of  attraction
between two bodies is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between them. subsequently supplanted by einstein's general relativity.
nonperturbative. feature of a theory whose validity is not dependent on approximate, perturbative
calculations; an exact feature of a theory.
nucleus. the core of an atom, consisting of protons and neutrons.
observer.  idealized  person  or  piece  of  equipment,  often  hypothetical,  that  measures  relevant
properties of a physical system.
one-loop process. contribution to a calculation in perturbation theory in which one virtual pair of
strings (or particles in a point-particle theory) is involved.
open string. a type of string with two free ends.
oscillatory pattern. see vibrational pattern.
particle  accelerator.  machine  for  boosting  particles  to  nearly  light  speed  and  slamming  them
together in order to probe the structure of matter.
perturbation  theory.  framework  for  simplifying  a  difficult  problem  by  finding  an  approximate
solution that is subsequently refined as more details, initially ignored, are systematically included.

the electromagnetic  force  field;  messenger  particle  of  the

perturbative approach, perturbative method. see perturbation theory.
phase. when used in reference to matter, describes its possible states: solid phase, liquid phase, gas
phase. more generally, refers to the possible descriptions of a physical system as features on which it
depends (temperature, string coupling constant values, form of spacetime, etc.) are varied.
phase transition. evolution of a physical system from one phase to another.
photoelectric effect. phenomenon in which electrons are ejected from a metallic surface when light
is shone upon it.
photon.  smallest  packet  of 
electromagnetic force; smallest bundle of light.
planck energy. about 1,000 kilowatt hours. the energy necessary to probe to distances as small as
the planck length. the typical energy of a vibrating string in string theory.
planck length. about 10-33 centimeters. the scale below which quantum fluctuations in the fabric of
spacetime would become enormous. the size of a typical string in string theory.
planck  mass.  about  ten  billion  billion  times  the  mass  of  a proton;  about  one-hundredth  of  a
thousandth  of  a  gram;  about  the  mass  of  a  small  grain  of  dust.  the  typical  mass  equivalent  of  a
vibrating string in string theory.
planck's  constant.  denoted  by  the  symbol h,  planck's  constant  is  a  fundamental  parameter  in
quantum mechanics. it determines the size of the discrete units of energy, mass, spin, etc. into which
the microscopic world is partitioned. its value is 1.05 × 10-27 grams-cm/sec.
planck tension. about 1039 tons. the tension on a typical string in string theory.
planck time. about 10-43 seconds. time at which the size of the universe was roughly the planck
length; more precisely, time it takes light to travel the planck length.
primordial nucleosynthesis. production of atomic nuclei occurring during the first three minutes after
the big bang.
principle of equivalence.  core  principle  of general relativity declaring the indistinguishability of
accelerated motion and immersion in a gravitational field (over small enough regions of observation).
generalizes  the principle  of  relativity  by  showing  that  all  observers,  regardless  of  their  state  of
motion, can claim to be at rest, so long as they acknowledge the presence of a suitable gravitational
field.
principle  of  relativity.  core  principle  of special  relativity  declaring  that  all  constant-velocity
observers are subject to an identical set of physical laws and that, therefore, every constant-velocity
observer is justified in claiming that he or she is at rest. this principle is generalized by the principle
of equivalence.
product. the result of multiplying two numbers.
proton.  positively  charged  particle,  typically  found  in  the  nucleus  of  an atom,  consisting  of  three
quarks (two up-quarks and one down-quark).
quanta. the smallest physical units into which something can be partitioned, according to the laws
of quantum mechanics. for instance, photons are the quanta of the electromagnetic field.

quantum  chromodynamics  (qcd).  relativistic  quantum  field  theory  of  the strong  force  and
quarks, incorporating special relativity.
quantum claustrophobia. see quantum fluctuations.
quantum determinism.  property  of quantum mechanics  that  knowledge  of  the  quantum  state  of  a
system at one moment completely determines its quantum state at future and past moments. knowledge
of the quantum state, however, determines only the probability that one or another future will actually
ensue.
quantum electrodynamics (qed). relativistic quantum field theory of the electromagnetic force
and electrons, incorporating special relativity.
quantum electroweak theory. see electroweak theory.
quantum field theory. see relativistic quantum field theory.
quantum fluctuation. turbulent behavior of a system on microscopic scales due to the uncertainty
principle.
quantum foam. see spacetime foam.
quantum  geometry.  modification  of riemannian  geometry  required  to  describe  accurately  the
physics of space on ultramicroscopic scales, where quantum effects become important.
quantum gravity. a  theory  that  successfully  mergers quantum  mechanics  and general  relativity,
possibly involving modifications of one or both. string theory is an example of a theory of quantum
gravity.
quantum mechanics. framework of laws governing the universe whose unfamiliar features such as
uncertainty,  quantum  fluctuations,  and wave-particle  duality  become  most  apparent  on  the
microscopic scales of atoms and subnuclear particles.
quantum tunneling. feature of quantum mechanics showing that objects can pass through barriers
that should be impenetrable according to newton's classical laws of physics.
quark. a particle that is acted upon by the strong force. quarks exist in six varieties (up, down,
charm, strange, top, bottom) and three "colors" (red, green, blue).
radiation. the energy carried by waves or particles.
reciprocal. the inverse of a number; for example, the reciprocal of 3 is 1/3, the reciprocal of 1/2 is
2.
relativistic  quantum 
electromagnetic field, that incorporates special relativity.
resonance. one of the natural states of oscillation of a physical system.
riemannian  geometry.  mathematical  framework  for  describing  curved  shapes  of  any  dimension.
plays a central role in einstein's description of spacetime in general relativity.
schrödinger  equation.  equation  governing  the  evolution  of  probability  waves  in quantum
mechanics.
schwarzschild solution. solution to the equations of general relativity for a spherical distribution of

theory.  quantum-mechanical 

field 

theory  of 

fields,  such  as 

the

matter; one implication of this solution is the possible existence of black holes.
second law of thermodynamics. law stating that total entropy always increases.
second superstring revolution. period in the development of string theory beginning around 1995 in
which some nonperturbative aspects of the theory began to be understood.
singularity. location where the fabric of space or spacetime suffers a devastating rupture.
smooth, smooth space. a spatial region in which the fabric of space is flat or gently curved, with no
pinches, ruptures, or creases of any kind.
space-tearing flop transition. see flop transition.
spacetime. a union of space and time originally emerging from special relativity. can be viewed as
the "fabric" out of which the universe is fashioned; it constitutes the dynamical arena within which the
events of the universe take place.
spacetime foam. frothy, writhing, tumultuous character of the spacetime fabric on ultramicroscopic
scales,  according  to  a  conventional  point-particle  perspective.  an  essential  reason  for  the
incompatibility of quantum mechanics and general relativity prior to string theory.
special  relativity.  einstein's  laws  of  space  and  time  in  the  absence  of  gravity  (see  also general
relativity).
sphere.  the  outer  surface  of  a  ball.  the  surface  of  a  familiar  three-dimensional  ball  has  two
dimensions  (which  can  be  labeled  by  two  numbers  such  as  "latitude"  and  "longitude,"  as  on  the
surface of the earth). the concept of a sphere, though, applies more generally to balls and hence their
surfaces, in any number of dimensions. a one-dimensional sphere is a fancy name for a circle; a zero-
dimensional sphere is two points (as explained in the text). a three-dimensional sphere is harder to
picture; it is the surface of a four-dimensional ball.
spin.  a  quantum-mechanical  version  of  the  familiar  notion  of  the  same  name;  particles  have  an
intrinsic  amount  of  spin  that  is  either  a  whole  number  or  half  a  whole  number  (in  multiples  of
planck's constant), and which never changes.
standard  model  of  cosmology.  big  bang  theory  together  with  an  understanding  of  the  three
nongravitational forces as summarized by the standard model of particle physics.
standard model of particle physics, standard model, standard theory. an enormously successful
theory of the three nongravitational forces and their action on matter. effectively the union of quantum
chromodynamics and the electroweak theory.
string. fundamental one-dimensional object that is the essential ingredient in string theory.
string coupling constant. a (positive) number that governs how likely it is for a given string to split
apart  into  two  strings  or  for  two  strings  to  join  together  into  one—the  basic  processes  in string
theory.  each string  theory  has  its  own  string  coupling  constant,  the  value  of  which  should  be
determined  by  an  equation;  currently  such  equations  are  not  understood  well  enough  to  yield  any
useful information. coupling constants less than 1 imply that perturbative methods are valid.
string mode. a possible configuration (vibrational pattern, winding configuration) that a string can
assume.
string theory. unified theory of the universe postulating that fundamental ingredients of nature are

not zero-dimensional point particles but tiny one-dimensional filaments called strings. string theory
harmoniously  unites quantum mechanics  and general relativity,  the  previously  known  laws  of  the
small and the large, that are otherwise incompatible. often short for superstring theory.
strong  force,  strong  nuclear  force.  strongest  of  the  four  fundamental  forces,  responsible  for
keeping quarks locked inside protons  and neutrons and for keeping protons and neutrons crammed
inside of atomic nuclei.
strong force symmetry. gauge symmetry underlying the strong force, associated with invariance of
a physical system under shifts in the color charges of quarks.
strongly coupled. theory whose string coupling constant is larger than 1.
strong-weak duality. situation in which a strongly coupled theory is dual—physically identical—to
a different, weakly coupled theory.
sum-over-paths.  formulation  of quantum  mechanics  in  which  particles  are  envisioned  to  travel
from one point to another along all possible paths between them.
supergravity. class of point-particle theories combining general relativity and supersymmetry.
superpartners. particles whose spins differ by 1/2 unit and that are paired by supersymmetry.
superstring theory. string theory that incorporates supersymmetry.
supersymmetric quantum field theory. quantum field theory incorporating supersymmetry.
supersymmetric  standard  model.  generalization  of  the standard  model  of  particle  physics  to
incorporate supersymmetry. entails a doubling of the known elementary particle species.
supersymmetry. a symmetry principle that relates the properties of particles with a whole number
amount of spin (bosons) to those with half a whole (odd) number amount of spin (fermions).
symmetry. a property of a physical system that does not change when the system is transformed in
some manner. for instance, a sphere is rotationally symmetrical since its appearance does not change
if it is rotated.
symmetry  breaking.  a  reduction  in  the  amount  of symmetry  a  system  appears  to  have,  usually
associated with a phase transition.
tachyon.  particle  whose  mass  (squared)  is  negative;  its  presence  in  a  theory  generally  yields
inconsistencies.
thermodynamics.  laws  developed  in  the  nineteenth  century  to  describe  aspects  of  heat,  work,
energy, entropy, and their mutual evolution in a physical system.
three-brane. see brane.
three-dimensional sphere. see sphere.
time dilation. feature emerging from special relativity, in which the flow of time slows down for an
observer in motion.
t.o.e. (theory of everything). a quantum-mechanical theory that encompasses all forces and all
matter.
topologically distinct. two shapes that cannot be deformed into one another without tearing their

structure in some manner.
topology. classification of shapes into groups that can be deformed into one another without ripping
or tearing their structure in any way.
topology-changing  transition.  evolution  of  spatial  fabric  that  involves  rips  or  tears,  thereby
changing the topology of space.
torus. the two-dimensional surface of a doughnut.
two-brane. see brane.
two-dimensional sphere. see sphere.
type i string theory. one of the five superstring theories; involves both open and closed strings.
type iia string theory.  one of the five superstring theories; involves closed strings with left-right
symmetric vibrational patterns.
type iib string theory. one of the five superstring theories; involves closed strings with left-right
asymmetric vibrational patterns.
ultramicroscopic. length scales shorter than the planck length (and also time scales shorter than the
planck time).
uncertainty principle.  principle  of quantum mechanics,  discovered  by  heisenberg,  that  there  are
features  of  the  universe,  like  the  position  and velocity  of  a  particle,  that  cannot  be  known  with
complete precision. such uncertain aspects of the microscopic world become ever more severe as the
distance  and  time  scales  on  which  they  are  considered  become  ever  smaller.  particles  and  fields
undulate and jump between all possible values consistent with the quantum uncertainty. this implies
that the microscopic realm is a roiling frenzy, awash in a violent sea of quantum fluctuations.
unified  theory,  unified  field  theory. any  theory  that  describes  all  four  forces  and  all  of  matter
within a single, all-encompassing framework.
uniform vibration. the overall motion of a string in which it moves without changes in shape.
velocity. the speed and the direction of an object's motion.
vibrational mode. see vibrational pattern.
vibrational pattern. the precise number of peaks and troughs as well as their amplitude as a string
oscillates.
vibration  number.   whole  number  describing  the  energy  in  the uniform  vibrational  motion  of  a
string; the energy in its overall motion as opposed to that associated with changes in its shape.
virtual particles. particles that erupt from the vacuum momentarily; they exist on borrowed energy,
consistent with the uncertainty principle, and rapidly annihilate, thereby repaying the energy loan.
wave function. probability waves upon which quantum mechanics is founded.
wavelength. the distance between successive peaks or troughs of a wave.
wave-particle duality. basic feature of quantum mechanics that objects manifest both wavelike and
particle-like properties.
w bosons. see weak gauge boson.

weak force, weak nuclear force.  one  of  the  four  fundamental  forces,  best  known  for  mediating
radioactive decay.
weak gauge boson. smallest bundle of the weak force field; messenger particle of the weak force;
called w or z boson.
weak gauge symmetry. gauge symmetry underlying the weak force.
weakly coupled. theory whose string coupling constant is less than 1.
winding energy. the energy embodied by a string wound around a circular dimension of space.
winding mode. a string configuration that wraps around a circular spatial dimension.
winding number. the number of times a string is wound around a circular spatial dimension.
world-sheet. two-dimensional surface swept out by a string as it moves.
wormhole. a tube-like region of space connecting one region of the universe to another.
z boson. see weak gauge boson.
zero-dimensional sphere. see sphere.

references and suggestions for further reading

abbot, edwin a. flatland: a romance of many dimensions. princeton: princeton university press,
1991.
barrow, john d. theories of everything. new york: fawcett-columbine, 1992.
bronowski, jacob. the ascent of man. boston: little, brown, 1973.
clark, ronald w. einstein, the life and times. new york: avon, 1984.
crease,  robert  p.,  and  charles  c.  mann. the  second  creation.  new  brunswick,  n.j.:  rutgers
university press, 1996.
davies, p. c. w. superforce. new york: simon & schuster, 1984.
davies,  p.  c.  w.,  and  j.  brown,  eds.  superstrings:  a  theory  of  everything?  cambridge,  eng.:
cambridge university press, 1988.
deutsch, david. the fabric of reality. new york: allen lane, 1997.
einstein, albert. the meaning of relativity. princeton: princeton university press, 1988.
———. relativity. new york: crown, 1961.
ferris, timothy. coming of age in the milky way. new york: anchor, 1989.
———. the whole shebang. new york: simon & schuster, 1997.
fölsing, albrecht. albert einstein. new york: viking, 1997.
feynman, richard. the character of physical law. cambridge, mass.: mit press, 1995.
gamow, george. mr. tompkins in paperback. cambridge, eng.: cambridge university press, 1993.
gell-mann, murray. the quark and the jaguar. new york: freeman, 1994.
glashow, sheldon. interactions. new york: time-warner books, 1988.
guth, alan h. the inflationary universe. reading, mass.: addison-wesley, 1997.
hawking, stephen. a brief history of time. new york: bantam books, 1988.
hawking,  stephen,  and  roger  penrose. the  nature  of  space  and  time.  princeton:  princeton
university press, 1996.
hey, tony, and patrick walters.  einstein's mirror.  cambridge, eng.: cambridge university press,
1997.
kaku, michio. beyond einstein. new york: anchor, 1987.
———. hyperspace. new york: oxford university press, 1994.
lederman, leon, with dick teresi. the god particle. boston: houghton mifflin, 1993.
lindley, david. the end of physics. new york: basic books, 1993.

———. where does the weirdness go? new york: basic books, 1996.
overbye, dennis, lonely hearts of the cosmos. new york: harpercollins, 1991.
pais, abraham. subtle is the lord: the science and the life of albert einstein. new york: oxford
university press, 1982.
penrose, roger. the emperor's new mind. oxford, eng.: oxford university press, 1989.
rees, martin j. before the beginning. reading, mass.: addison-wesley, 1997.
smolin, lee. the life of the cosmos. new york: oxford university press, 1997.
thorne, kip. black holes and time warps. new york: norton, 1994.
weinberg, steven. the first three minutes. new york: basic books, 1993.
———. dreams of a final theory. new york: pantheon, 1992.
wheeler, john a. a journey into gravity and spacetime. new york: scientific american library,
1990.

* some of the ideas in this and the next few sections are rather subtle, so don’t be put off if you have
trouble following every link in the explanatory chain—especially in a single reading.

* those readers who skipped over the “more precise answer” section of chapter 6 might find it
helpful to skim the beginning part of that section.

