


[CHARACTER] 
although the call of the wild is told
from the perspective of an anonymous third-person narrator, the
events that are recounted are those that the dog [CHARACTER] experiences
directly. as such, it is not unreasonable to call him the only fully
developed character in the story. he is the only character whose
past we know anything about, and london is careful to emphasize
the human qualities of his protagonist, enabling us to empathize
with the animal. filtered through the third-person omniscience of
the narrator, [CHARACTER] comes across as far more than a creature of instinct,
since he has a sense of wonder, shame, and justice. he also possesses
a capacity for mystical experiences and for great, unselfish love,
as his relationship to thornton amply demonstrates. he may be a
dog, but he is more human than many of the people around him.

[CHARACTER]'s story is cyclical: he is introduced as a pampered
prince, and the story concludes with [CHARACTER] as a veritable king of
beasts.  in between, [CHARACTER] undergoes experiences that provide him
with greater insight about the world. [CHARACTER] begins as a spoiled regent,
strutting proudly over his soft, sun-kissed domain, but he abruptly
sees everything taken away from him. he is reduced to nothing, beaten
and kicked and forced to pull sleds through the canadian wilderness. this
experience, though, far from destroying him, makes him stronger,
and he wins back his kingdom--or rather, he wins a new kingdom, a
wild one that better suits his true destiny as a wild animal. the
call of the wild is, as its title suggests, a celebration
of wildness, of primitive life, and even of savagery. [CHARACTER]'s rise
to greatness is not an easy path; it is a struggle, a course strewn
with obstacles, from the long duel with his rival spitz to the folly
of hal, mercedes, and charles. but these obstacles, london indicates,
are to be rejoiced in rather than avoided: life is ultimately a
long struggle for mastery, and the greatest dogs (or men), the [CHARACTER]s
of the world, will always seek out struggles in order to prove their
greatness. thus, when [CHARACTER] goes from being a moral, civilized pet
to a fierce, bloodthirsty, violent wolf-dog, we are glad rather
than shocked, because we know that he is fulfilling his highest
-possible destiny.
