


[CHARACTER]
intelligent, strikingly attractive, and distinguished
by her deep moral sensitivity and passionate intensity, tess is
indisputably the central character of the novel that bears her name.
but she is also more than a distinctive individual: hardy makes
her into somewhat of a mythic heroine. her name, formally theresa,
recalls st. teresa of avila, another martyr whose vision of a higher
reality cost her her life. other characters often refer to tess
in mythical terms, as when angel calls her a "daughter of nature"
in chapter xviii, or refers to her by the greek mythological names
"artemis" and "demeter" in chapter xx. the narrator himself sometimes
describes tess as more than an individual woman, but as something
closer to a mythical incarnation of womanhood. in chapter xiv, he
says that her eyes are "neither black nor blue nor grey nor violet;
rather all these shades together," like "an almost standard woman."
tess's story may thus be a "standard" story, representing a deeper
and larger experience than that of a single individual.

	in part, tess represents the changing role of the agricultural workers
in england in the late nineteenth century. possessing an education
that her unschooled parents lack, since she has passed the sixth
standard of the national schools, tess does not quite fit into the
folk culture of her predecessors, but financial constraints keep her
from rising to a higher station in life. she belongs in that higher world,
however, as we discover on the first page of the novel with the news
that the durbeyfields are the surviving members of the noble and
ancient family of the d'urbervilles. there is aristocracy in tess's blood,
visible in her graceful beauty--yet she is forced to work as a farmhand
and milkmaid. when she tries to express her joy by singing lower-class
folk ballads at the beginning of the third part of the novel, they
do not satisfy her--she seems not quite comfortable with those popular
songs. but, on the other hand, her diction, while more polished
than her mother's, is not quite up to the level of alec's or angel's.
she is in between, both socially and culturally. thus, tess is a
symbol of unclear and unstable notions of class in nineteenth-century
britain, where old family lines retained their earlier glamour, but
where cold economic realities made sheer wealth more important than
inner nobility.
	beyond her social symbolism, tess represents fallen humanity
in a religious sense, as the frequent biblical allusions in the
novel remind us. just as tess's clan was once glorious and powerful
but is now sadly diminished, so too did the early glory of the first
humans, adam and eve, fade with their expulsion from eden, making humans
sad shadows of what they once were. tess thus represents what is
known in christian theology as original sin, the
degraded state in which all humans live, even when--like tess herself
after killing prince or succumbing to alec--they are not wholly or directly
responsible for the sins for which they are punished. this torment
represents the most universal side of tess: she is the myth of the
human who suffers for crimes that are not her own and lives a life
more degraded than she deserves.
