


[CHARACTER] 
a freethinking son born into the family of a provincial
parson and determined to set himself up as a farmer instead of going
to cambridge like his conformist brothers, angel represents a rebellious striving
toward a personal vision of goodness. he is a secularist who yearns
to work for the "honor and glory of man," as he tells his father
in chapter xviii, rather than for the honor and glory of god in
a more distant world. a typical young nineteenth-century progressive,
angel sees human society as a thing to be remolded and improved,
and he fervently believes in the nobility of man. he rejects the
values handed to him, and sets off in search of his own. his love
for tess, a mere milkmaid and his social inferior, is one expression
of his disdain for tradition. this independent spirit contributes
to his aura of charisma and general attractiveness that makes him
the love object of all the milkmaids with whom he works at talbothays.

	as his name--in french, close to "bright angel"--suggests, angel
is not quite of this world, but floats above it in a transcendent sphere
of his own. the narrator says that angel shines rather than burns
and that he is closer to the intellectually aloof poet shelley than
to the fleshly and passionate poet byron. his love for tess may be
abstract, as we guess when he calls her "daughter of nature" or "demeter."
tess may be more an archetype or ideal to him than a flesh and blood
woman with a complicated life. angel's ideals of human purity are
too elevated to be applied to actual people: mrs. durbeyfield's
easygoing moral beliefs are much more easily accommodated to real
lives such as tess's. angel awakens to the actual complexities of
real-world morality after his failure in brazil, and only then he
realizes he has been unfair to tess. his moral system is readjusted
as he is brought down to earth. ironically, it is not the angel
who guides the human in this novel, but the human who instructs
the angel, although at the cost of her own life.
