


Prince Harry 
The complex Prince Harry is at the center of events in 
1 Henry
IV. As the only character to move between the grave, serious
world of King Henry and Hotspur and the rollicking, comical world
of Falstaff and the Boar's Head Tavern, Harry serves as a bridge
uniting the play's two major plotlines. An initially disreputable
prince who eventually wins back his honor and the king's esteem,
Harry undergoes the greatest dramatic development in the play, deliberately transforming
himself from the wastrel he pretends to be into a noble leader.
Additionally, as the character whose sense of honor and leadership
Shakespeare most directly endorses, Harry is, at least by implication,
the moral focus of the play.

	Harry is nevertheless a complicated character and one
whose real nature is very difficult to pin down. As the play opens,
Harry has been idling away his time with Falstaff and earning the
displeasure of both his father and England as a whole. He then surprises
everyone by declaring that his dissolute lifestyle is all an act:
he is simply trying to lower the expectations that surround him
so that, when he must, he can emerge as his true, heroic self, shock
the whole country, and win the people's love and his father's admiration.
Harry is clearly intelligent and already capable of the psychological
machinations required of kings.
	But the heavy measure of deceit involved in his plan
seems to call his honor into question, and his treatment of Falstaff
further sullies his name: though there seems to be real affection
between the prince and the roguish knight, Harry is quite capable
of tormenting and humiliating his friend (and, when he becomes king
in 
2 Henry IV, of disowning
him altogether). Shakespeare seems to include these aspects of Harry's
character in order to illustrate that Falstaff's selfish bragging
does not fool Harry and to show that Harry is capable of making
the difficult personal choices that a king must make in order to
rule a nation well. In any case, Harry's emergence here as a heroic
young prince is probably 
1 Henry
IV's defining dynamic, and it opens the door for Prince
Harry to become the great King Henry V in the next two plays in
Shakespeare's sequence.
