


Sir John Falstaff 
Old, fat, lazy, selfish, dishonest, corrupt, thieving,
manipulative, boastful, and lecherous, Falstaff is, despite his
many negative qualities, perhaps the most popular of all of Shakespeare's
comic characters. Though he is technically a knight, Falstaff's
lifestyle clearly renders him incompatible with the ideals of courtly
chivalry that one typically associates with knighthood. For instance,
Falstaff is willing to commit robbery for the money and entertainment
of it. As Falstaff himself notes at some length, honor is useless
to him: "Can honour set-to a leg? No. Or an arm? No. Or take away
the grief of a wound? No. . . . What is honour? A word" (V.i.130-133).
He perceives honor as a mere "word," an abstract concept that has
no relevance to practical matters. Nevertheless, though Falstaff
mocks honor by linking it to violence, to which it is intimately
connected throughout the play, he remains endearing and likable
to Shakespeare's audiences. Two reasons that Falstaff retains this
esteem are that he plays his scoundrel's role with such gusto and
that he never enjoys enough success to become a real villain; even
his highway robbery ends in humiliation for him.
	Falstaff seems to scorn morality largely because he has
such a hearty appetite for life and finds the niceties of courtesy
and honor useless when there are jokes to be told and feasts to
be eaten. Largely a creature of words, Falstaff has earned the admiration
of some Shakespearean scholars because of the self-creation he achieves through
language: Falstaff is constantly creating a myth of Falstaff, and
this myth defines his identity even when it is visibly revealed
to be false. A master of punning and wordplay, Falstaff provides
most of the comedy in the play (just as he does in 
2 Henry
IV, The Merry Wives of Windsor, and Henry
V). He redeems himself largely through his real affection
for Prince Harry, whom, despite everything, he seems to regard as
a real friend. This affection makes Harry's decision, foreshadowed
in 
1 Henry IV, to abandon
Falstaff when he becomes king (in 
2 Henry
IV) seem all the more harsh.
