


[CHARACTER]
strether's experiences, observations, thoughts, and reflections essentially
compose the ambassadors. even though the novel
is not told in strether's voice, his point of view fills the work
and he is its central consciousness. each event gets filtered through
strether's eyes and mind. similarly, every comment uttered by the
narrator reflects strether's impressions and biases. for these reasons,
strether is the most important character in the novel. but although
strether appears in every facet of the story, he has very little
influence over the other characters. he tries, often nobly, to motivate
the characters, as when he attempts to convince sarah pocock of
madame de vionnet's worthiness or when he tells chad that he should
remain in europe. ultimately, however, strether fails to spur the
others to act or behave as he wants them to. in the end, strether
himself changes the most, as the world he observes influences and
affects him.

over the course of the ambassadors, strether
transforms from a close-minded puritan from a small town in the
united states to a broad-minded man with a european, cosmopolitan
outlook. as the novel begins, strether is unable to enjoy the experience
of his own life and cannot act confidently of his own volition.
he arrives in paris ready to blindly follow mrs. newsome's orders.
he finds himself afraid to diverge from this burdensome task in
any small way. throughout his time in europe, however, strether
changes greatly. his conversations with miss gostrey teach him to
see the world in a european way. gradually he gains confidence,
learns to trust his own judgment, and realizes that his priorities
have been wrong. strether leaves europe not because he has renounced
the freedom and openness he discovered there. rather, strether leaves
because he believes himself too old and too set in his ways to give
up the only life he has ever known--the small-town life of woollett,
massachusetts. strether's greatest disappointment is his failure
to convince chad to stay in europe. chad, however, has an irreversible
and inestimable influence on strether, who will never see the world,
and especially not woollett, massachusetts, the same again.
