
the swimmer

it was one of those midsummer sundays when everyone sits

around saying, “i drank too much last night.” you might
have  heard  it  whispered  by  the  parishioners  leaving  church,
heard it from the lips of the priest himself, struggling with his
cassock in the vestiarium, heard it from the golf links and the
tennis  courts,  heard  it  from  the  wildlife  preserve  where  the
leader  of  the  audubon  group  was  suffering  from  a  terrible
hangover. “i drank too much,” said donald westerhazy. “we
all drank too much,” said lucinda merrill. “it must have been
the wine,” said helen westerhazy. “i drank too much of that
claret.”

this was at the edge of the westerhazys’ pool. the pool, fed
by an artesian well with a high iron content, was a pale shade
of green. it was a ﬁne day. in the west there was a massive stand
of cumulus cloud so like a city seen from a distance— from the
bow of an approaching ship— that it might have had a name.
lisbon. hackensack. the sun was hot. neddy merrill sat by
the green  water, one hand in it, one around a glass of gin. he
was a slender man— he seemed to have the especial slenderness
of youth— and while he was far from young he had slid down
his  banister  that   morning  and  given  the  bronze  backside  of
aphrodite on the hall table a smack, as he jogged  toward the
smell of coffee in his dining room. he might have been com-
pared to a summer’s day, particularly the last hours of one, and
while he lacked a tennis racket or a sail bag the impression was
deﬁnitely one of youth, sport, and clement weather. he had
been swimming and now he was breathing deeply, stertorously
as if he could gulp into his lungs the components of that mo-
ment, the heat of the sun, the intenseness of his plea sure. it all
seemed to ﬂow into his chest. his own house stood in bullet
park, eight miles to the south, where his four beautiful daugh-
ters would have had their lunch and might be playing tennis.
then it occurred to him that by taking a dogleg to the south-
west he could reach his home by  water.

his life was not conﬁning and the delight he took in this ob-
servation could not be explained by its suggestion of escape.

are you receiving story of the week each week?

sign up now at storyoftheweek.loa.org to receive our weekly alert so

you won’t miss a single story!



he  seemed  to  see,  with  a  cartographer’s  eye,  that  string  of
swimming pools, that quasi-subterranean stream that curved
across the county. he had made a discovery, a contribution to
modern geography; he would name the stream lucinda  after
his wife. he was not a practical joker nor was he a fool but he
was determinedly original and had a vague and modest idea of
himself  as  a  legendary  ﬁgure.  the  day  was  beautiful  and  it
seemed to him that a long swim might enlarge and celebrate
its beauty.

he took off a sweater that was hung over his shoulders and
dove in. he had an inexplicable contempt for men who did
not  hurl  themselves  into  pools.  he  swam  a  choppy  crawl,
breathing  either with every stroke or every fourth stroke and
counting somewhere well in the back of his mind the one-two
one-two of a ﬂutter kick. it was not a ser viceable stroke for
long distances but the domestication of swimming had saddled
the  sport  with  some  customs  and  in  his  part  of  the  world  a
crawl  was  customary.  to  be  embraced  and  sustained  by  the
light green  water was less a plea sure, it seemed, than the re-
sumption of a natural condition, and he would have liked to
swim without trunks, but this was not possible, considering his
project. he hoisted himself up on the far curb— he never used
the ladder— and started across the lawn. when lucinda asked
where he was  going he said he was  going to swim home.

the  only  maps  and  charts  he  had  to  go  by  were  remem-
bered  or  imaginary  but  these  were  clear  enough.  first  there
were the grahams, the hammers, the lears, the howlands, and
the crosscups. he would cross ditmar street to the bunkers
and come,  after a short portage, to the levys, the welchers,
and the public pool in lancaster. then there were the hallo-
rans,  the  sachses,  the  biswangers,  shirley  adams,  the  gil -
martins, and the clydes. the day was lovely, and that he lived
in  a  world  so  generously  supplied  with   water  seemed  like  a
clemency, a beneﬁcence. his heart was high and he ran across
the grass. making his way home by an uncommon route gave
him the feeling that he was a pilgrim, an explorer, a man with
a destiny, and he knew that he would ﬁnd friends all along the
way; friends would line the banks of the lucinda river.

he went through a hedge that separated the westerhazys’
land from the grahams’, walked  under some  ﬂowering apple


the stories of john cheever

trees, passed the shed that housed their pump and ﬁlter, and
came out at the grahams’ pool. “why, neddy,” mrs. graham
said, “what a marvelous surprise. i’ve been trying to get you
on the phone all  morning. here, let me get you a drink.” he
saw then, like any explorer, that the hospitable customs and
traditions of the natives would have to be handled with diplo-
macy if he was ever  going to reach his destination. he did not
want to mystify or seem rude to the grahams nor did he have
the time to linger there. he swam the length of their pool and
joined them in the sun and was rescued, a few minutes later, by
the arrival of two carloads of friends from connecticut. during
the  uproarious  reunions  he  was  able  to  slip  away.  he  went
down by the front of the grahams’ house, stepped over a
thorny hedge, and crossed a vacant lot to the hammers’. mrs.
hammer,   looking  up  from  her  roses,  saw  him  swim  by
 although she  wasn’t quite sure who it was. the lears heard
him splashing past the open  windows of their living room. the
howlands and the crosscups were away.  after leaving the how -
lands’ he crossed ditmar street and started for the bunkers’,
where he could hear, even at that distance, the noise of a party.
the   water  refracted  the  sound  of  voices  and  laughter  and
seemed to suspend it in midair. the bunkers’ pool was on a
rise and he climbed some stairs to a terrace where twenty-ﬁve
or thirty men and women were drinking. the only person in
the   water  was  rusty  towers,  who  ﬂoated  there  on  a  rubber
raft. oh, how bonny and lush were the banks of the lucinda
river! prosperous men and women gathered by the sapphire-
 colored  waters while caterer’s men in white coats passed them
cold  gin.  overhead  a  red  de  haviland  trainer  was  circling
around and around and around in the sky with something like
the glee of a child in a swing. ned felt a passing affection for
the scene, a tenderness for the gathering, as if it was something
he might touch. in the distance he heard  th under. as soon as
enid bunker saw him she  began to scream: “oh, look who’s
here! what a marvelous surprise! when lucinda said that you
 couldn’t come i thought i’d die.” she made her way to him
through the crowd, and when they had ﬁnished kissing she led
him to the bar, a prog ress that was slowed by the fact that he
stopped to kiss eight or ten  other women and shake the hands
of as many men. a smiling bartender he had seen at a hundred


parties gave him a gin and tonic and he stood by the bar for a
moment,  anxious  not  to  get  stuck  in  any  conversation  that
would  delay  his  voyage.  when  he  seemed  about  to  be  sur-
rounded he dove in and swam close to the side to avoid col -
liding with rusty’s raft. at the far end of the pool he bypassed
the tomlinsons with a broad smile and jogged up the garden
path. the gravel cut his feet but this was the only unpleasant-
ness.  the  party  was  conﬁned  to  the  pool,  and  as  he  went
 toward the house he heard the brilliant,  watery sound of voices
fade, heard the noise of a  radio from the bunkers’ kitchen,
where  someone  was  listening  to  a  ball  game.  sunday   after -
noon. he made his way through the parked cars and down the
grassy b order of their driveway to alewives lane. he did not
want to be seen on the road in his bathing trunks but there
was  no  trafﬁc  and  he  made  the  short  distance  to  the  levys’
driveway, marked with a private property sign and a green
tube for the new york times. all the doors and  windows of
the big house were open but there were no signs of life; not
even a dog barked. he went around the side of the house to
the pool and saw that the levys had only recently left. glasses
and bottles and dishes of nuts were on a table at the deep end,
where there was a bathhouse or gazebo, hung with japanese
lanterns.  after swimming the pool he got himself a glass and
poured  a  drink.  it  was  his  fourth  or  ﬁfth  drink  and  he  had
swum nearly half the length of the lucinda river. he felt tired,
clean, and pleased at that moment to be alone; pleased with
everything.

it  would  storm.  the  stand  of  cumulus  cloud— that  city—
had risen and darkened, and while he sat there he heard the
percussiveness of  th under again. the de haviland trainer was
still  circling  overhead  and  it  seemed  to  ned  that  he  could
 almost hear the pilot laugh with plea sure in the  afternoon; but
when there was  an other peal of  th under he took off for home.
a train whistle blew and he wondered what time it had gotten
to be. four? five? he thought of the provincial station at that
hour,  where  a  waiter,  his  tuxedo  concealed  by  a  raincoat,  a
dwarf with some  ﬂowers wrapped in news paper, and a woman
who had been crying would be waiting for the local. it was
suddenly growing dark; it was that moment when the pin-
headed birds seem to organize their song into some acute and

the stories of john cheever

knowl edgeable  recognition  of  the  storm’s  approach.  then
there was a ﬁne noise of rushing  water from the crown of an
oak at his back, as if a spigot there had been turned. then the
noise of fountains came from the crowns of all the tall trees.
why did he love storms, what was the meaning of his excite-
ment when the door sprang open and the rain wind ﬂed rudely
up the stairs, why had the simple task of shutting the  windows
of an old house seemed ﬁtting and urgent, why did the ﬁrst
 watery notes of a storm wind have for him the unmistakable
sound of good news, cheer, glad tidings? then there was an
explosion,  a  smell  of  cordite,  and  rain  lashed  the  japanese
lanterns that mrs. levy had bought in kyoto the year  before
last, or was it the year  before that?

he stayed in the levys’ gazebo  until the storm had passed.
the rain had cooled the air and he shivered. the force of the
wind had stripped a maple of its red and yellow leaves and
scattered them over the grass and the  water. since it was mid-
summer the tree must be blighted, and yet he felt a peculiar
sadness at this sign of autumn. he braced his shoulders, emp-
tied his glass, and started for the welchers’ pool. this meant
crossing the lindleys’ riding ring and he was surprised to ﬁnd
it overgrown with grass and all the jumps dismantled. he won-
dered if the lindleys had sold their horses or gone away for the
summer and put them out to board. he seemed to remember
 having heard something about the lindleys and their horses
but the memory was   unclear. on he went, barefoot through
the wet grass, to the welchers’, where he found their pool was
dry.

this breach in his chain of  water disappointed him absurdly,
and he felt like some explorer who seeks a torrential head water
and ﬁnds a dead stream. he was disappointed and mystiﬁed. it
was common enough to go away for the summer but no one
ever drained his pool. the welchers had deﬁnitely gone away.
the pool furniture was folded, stacked, and covered with a tar-
paulin. the bathhouse was locked. all the  windows of the house
were shut, and when he went around to the driveway in front
he  saw  a  for  sale sign  nailed  to  a  tree.  when  had  he  last
heard from the welchers— when, that is, had he and lucinda
last regretted an invitation to dine with them? it seemed only a
week  or  so  ago.  was  his  memory  failing  or  had  he  so  disci-

plined it in the repression of unpleasant facts that he had dam-
aged his sense of the truth? then in the distance he heard the
sound of a tennis game. this cheered him, cleared away all his
apprehensions and let him regard the overcast sky and the cold
air  with  indifference.  this  was  the  day  that  neddy  merrill
swam across the county. that was the day! he started off then
for his most difﬁcult portage.

had you gone for a sunday  afternoon ride that day you might
have seen him, close to naked, standing on the shoulders of
route  424,  waiting  for  a  chance  to  cross.  you  might  have
wondered if he was the victim of foul play, had his car broken
down, or was he merely a fool. standing barefoot in the de-
posits of the highway— beer cans, rags, and blowout patches—
exposed  to  all  kinds  of  ridicule,  he  seemed  pitiful.  he  had
known when he started that this was a part of his journey— it
had been on his maps— but confronted with the lines of trafﬁc,
worming through the summery light, he found himself unpre-
pared. he was laughed at, jeered at, a beer can was thrown at
him, and he had no dignity or humor to bring to the situation.
he could have gone back, back to the westerhazys’, where lu -
cinda would still be sitting in the sun. he had signed  nothing,
vowed  nothing, pledged  nothing, not even to himself. why,
believing as he did, that all  human obduracy was susceptible to
common sense, was he unable to turn back? why was he de-
termined to complete his journey even if it meant putting his
life  in  danger?  at  what  point  had  this  prank,  this  joke,  this
piece of horseplay  become serious? he could not go back, he
could not even recall with any clearness the green  water at
the westerhazys’, the sense of inhaling the day’s components,
the friendly and relaxed voices saying that they had drunk too
much. in the space of an hour, more or less, he had covered a
distance that made his return impossible.

an old man, tooling down the highway at ﬁfteen miles an
hour, let him get to the middle of the road, where there was a
grass divider. here he was exposed to the ridicule of the north -
bound trafﬁc, but  after ten or ﬁfteen minutes he was able to
cross. from here he had only a short walk to the recreation
center at the edge of the village of lancaster, where there were
some handball courts and a public pool.



the stories of john cheever

the  effect of the  water on voices, the illusion of brilliance
and suspense, was the same here as it had been at the bunkers’
but the sounds here were louder, harsher, and more shrill, and
as  soon  as  he  entered  the  crowded  enclosure  he  was  con-
fronted  with  regimentation.  “all  swimmers  must  take  a
shower  before using the pool. all swimmers must use
the footbath. all swimmers must wear their identifi-
cation disks.” he took a shower, washed his feet in a cloudy
and bitter solution, and made his way to the edge of the  water.
it stank of chlorine and looked to him like a sink. a pair of life-
guards in a pair of towers blew police whistles at what seemed
to  be  regular  intervals  and  abused  the  swimmers  through  a
public address system. neddy remembered the sapphire  water
at the bunkers’ with longing and thought that he might con-
taminate himself— damage his own prosperousness and charm
— by swimming in this murk, but he reminded himself that he
was an explorer, a pilgrim, and that this was merely a stagnant
bend in the lucinda river. he dove, scowling with distaste,
into the chlorine and had to swim with his head above  water to
avoid  collisions,  but  even  so  he  was  bumped  into,  splashed,
and jostled. when he got to the shallow end both lifeguards
were shouting at him: “hey, you, you without the identiﬁca-
tion disk, get outa the  water.” he did, but they had no way of
pursuing him and he went through the reek of suntan oil and
chlorine out through the hurricane fence and passed the hand-
ball courts. by crossing the road he entered the wooded part
of the halloran estate. the woods were not cleared and the
footing was treacherous and difﬁcult  until he reached the lawn
and the clipped beech hedge that encircled their pool.

the hallorans were friends, an elderly couple of enormous
wealth who seemed to bask in the suspicion that they might be
communists. they were zealous reformers but they were not
communists, and yet when they were accused, as they some-
times were, of subversion, it seemed to gratify and excite them.
their beech hedge was yellow and he guessed this had been
blighted like the levys’ maple. he called hullo, hullo, to warn
the hallorans of his approach, to palliate his invasion of their
privacy.  the  hallorans,  for  reasons  that  had  never  been  ex-
plained to him, did not wear bathing suits. no explanations
were in  order,  really. their nakedness was a detail in their un-


compromising zeal for reform and he stepped politely out of
his trunks  before he went through the opening in the hedge.
mrs. halloran, a stout woman with white hair and a serene
face,  was  reading  the  times.  mr.  halloran  was  taking  beech
leaves  out  of  the   water  with  a  scoop.  they  seemed  not  sur-
prised  or  displeased  to  see  him.  their  pool  was  perhaps  the
oldest in the country, a ﬁeldstone rectangle, fed by a brook. it
had no ﬁlter or pump and its  waters were the opaque gold of
the stream.

“i’m swimming across the county,” ned said.
“why, i  didn’t know one could,” exclaimed mrs. halloran.
“well, i’ve made it from the westerhazys’,” ned said. “that

must be about four miles.”

he left his trunks at the deep end, walked to the shallow
end, and swam this stretch. as he was pulling himself out of the
 water he heard mrs. halloran say, “we’ve been terribly sorry
to hear about all your misfortunes, neddy.”

“my  misfortunes?”  ned  asked.  “i   don’t  know  what  you

“yes,” mrs. halloran sighed. “yes  . . .” her voice ﬁlled the
air  with  an  unseasonable  melancholy  and  ned  spoke  briskly.
“thank you for the swim.”

“well, have a nice trip,” said mrs. halloran.
beyond  the  hedge  he  pulled  on  his  trunks  and  fastened
them. they were loose and he wondered if, during the space
of an  afternoon, he could have lost some weight. he was cold
and he was tired and the naked hallorans and their dark  water
had depressed him. the swim was too much for his strength
but how could he have guessed this, sliding down the banister
that   morning  and  sitting  in  the  westerhazys’  sun?  his  arms
were lame. his legs felt rubbery and ached at the joints. the
worst of it was the cold in his bones and the feeling that he
might never be warm again. leaves were falling down around
him and he smelled wood smoke on the wind. who would be
burning wood at this time of year?

he needed a drink. whiskey would warm him, pick him up,

mean.”

poor children  . . .”

girls are at home.”

“why,  we  heard  that  you’d  sold  the  house  and  that  your

“i  don’t recall  having sold the house,” ned said, “and the



the stories of john cheever

carry him through the last of his journey, refresh his feeling
that  it  was  original  and  valorous  to  swim  across  the  county.
channel swimmers took brandy. he needed a stimulant. he
crossed the lawn in front of the hallorans’ house and went
down a  little path to where they had built a house for their
only daughter, helen, and her husband, eric sachs. the
sachses’ pool was small and he found helen and her husband
there.

“oh, neddy,” helen said. “did you lunch at m other’s?”
“not   really,”  ned  said.  “i  did stop  to  see  your  parents.”
this seemed to be explanation enough. “i’m terribly sorry to
break in on you like this but i’ve taken a chill and i wonder if
you’d give me a drink.”

“why, i’d love to,” helen said, “but there hasn’t been any-
thing in this house to drink since eric’s operation. that was
three years ago.”

was  he  losing  his  memory,  had  his  gift  for  concealing
painful facts let him forget that he had sold his house, that his
children were in trouble, and that his friend had been ill? his
eyes  slipped  from  eric’s  face  to  his  abdomen,  where  he  saw
three pale, sutured scars, two of them at least a foot long. gone
was  his  navel,  and  what,  neddy  thought,  would  the  roving
hand, bed-checking one’s gifts at 3 a.m., make of a belly with
no navel, no link to birth, this breach in the succession?

“i’m sure you can get a drink at the biswangers’,” helen
said. “they’re  having an enormous do. you can hear it from
here. listen!”

she raised her head and from across the road, the lawns, the
gardens, the woods, the ﬁelds, he heard again the brilliant noise
of voices over  water. “well, i’ll get wet,” he said, still feeling
that he had no freedom of choice about his means of travel.
he  dove  into  the  sachses’  cold   water  and,  gasping,  close  to
drowning, made his way from one end of the pool to the  other.
“lucinda  and  i  want  terribly to  see  you,”  he  said  over  his
shoulder, his face set  toward the biswangers’. “we’re sorry it’s
been so long and we’ll call you very soon.”

he crossed some ﬁelds to the biswangers’ and the sounds of
revelry  there.  they  would  be  honored  to  give  him  a  drink,
they would be happy to give him a drink. the biswangers in-
vited him and lucinda for dinner four times a year, six weeks


in advance. they were  always rebuffed and yet they continued
to  send  out  their  invitations,  unwilling  to  comprehend  the
rigid and undemocratic realities of their society. they were the
sort of  people who discussed the price of things at cocktails,
exchanged  market  tips  during  dinner,  and   after  dinner  told
dirty stories to mixed company. they did not belong to neddy’s
set— they were not even on lucinda’s christmas-card list. he
went  toward their pool with feelings of indifference, charity,
and some unease, since it seemed to be getting dark and these
were the longest days of the year. the party when he joined it
was noisy and large. grace biswanger was the kind of hostess
who  asked  the  optometrist,  the  veterinarian,  the  real-estate
dealer,  and  the  dentist.  no  one  was  swimming  and  the  twi-
light, reﬂected on the  water of the pool, had a wintry gleam.
there was a bar and he started for this. when grace biswanger
saw  him  she  came   toward  him,  not  affectionately  as  he  had
every right to expect, but bellicosely.

“why, this party has everything,” she said loudly, “including

a gate crasher.”

she could not deal him a social blow— there was no question
about this and he did not ﬂinch. “as a gate crasher,” he asked
politely, “do i rate a drink?”

“suit yourself,” she said. “you  don’t seem to pay much at-

tention to invitations.”

she turned her back on him and joined some guests, and he
went to the bar and  ordered a whiskey. the bartender served
him but he served him rudely. his was a world in which the
caterer’s  men  kept  the  social  score,  and  to  be  rebuffed  by  a
part-time barkeep meant that he had suffered some loss of
social esteem. or perhaps the man was new and uninformed.
then he heard grace at his back say: “they went for broke
overnight—  nothing  but  income— and  he  showed  up  drunk
one  sunday  and  asked  us  to  loan  him  ﬁve  thousand  dol-
lars. . . .” she was  always talking about money. it was worse
than eating your peas off a knife. he dove into the pool, swam
its length and went away.

the next pool on his list, the last but two, belonged to his
old mistress, shirley adams. if he had suffered any injuries at
the  biswangers’  they  would  be  cured  here.  love— sexual
roughhouse in fact— was the supreme elixir, the pain killer, the

the stories of john cheever

brightly  colored pill that would put the spring back into his
step,  the  joy  of  life  in  his  heart.  they  had  had  an  affair  last
week, last month, last year. he  couldn’t remember. it was he
who had broken it off, his was the  upper hand, and he stepped
through  the  gate  of  the  wall  that  surrounded  her  pool  with
 nothing so considered as self-conﬁdence. it seemed in a way to
be his pool, as the lover, particularly the illicit lover, enjoys the
possessions of his mistress with an authority unknown to holy
matrimony. she was there, her hair the  color of brass, but her
ﬁgure,  at  the  edge  of  the  lighted,  cerulean   water,  excited  in
him no profound memories. it had been, he thought, a light-
hearted  affair,   although  she  had  wept  when  he  broke  it  off.
she seemed confused to see him and he wondered if she was
still wounded. would she, god forbid, weep again?

“what do you want?” she asked.
“i’m swimming across the county.”
“good christ. will you ever grow up?”
“what’s the  matter?”
“if you’ve come here for money,” she said, “i won’t give

you  an other cent.”

“you could give me a drink.”
“i could but i won’t. i’m not alone.”
“well, i’m on my way.”
he dove in and swam the pool, but when he tried to haul
himself up onto the curb he found that the strength in his arms
and  shoulders  had  gone,  and  he  paddled  to  the  ladder  and
climbed out. looking over his shoulder he saw, in the lighted
bathhouse,  a  young  man.  going  out  onto  the  dark  lawn  he
smelled chrysanthemums or marigolds— some stubborn au -
tum nal fragrance— on the night air, strong as gas. looking over -
head he saw that the stars had come out, but why should he
seem to see andromeda, cepheus, and cassiopeia? what had
 become of the constellations of midsummer? he  began to cry.
it was prob ably the ﬁrst time in his adult life that he had ever
cried, certainly the ﬁrst time in his life that he had ever felt so
miserable, cold, tired, and bewildered. he could not  under -
stand the rudeness of the caterer’s barkeep or the rudeness of a
mistress who had come to him on her knees and showered his
trousers with tears. he had swum too long, he had been im-
mersed too long, and his nose and his throat were sore from

the  water. what he needed then was a drink, some company,
and some clean, dry clothes, and while he could have cut  directly
across  the  road  to  his  home  he  went  on  to  the  gilmartins’
pool. here, for the ﬁrst time in his life, he did not dive but
went down the steps into the icy  water and swam a hobbled
sidestroke that he might have learned as a youth. he staggered
with fatigue on his way to the clydes’ and paddled the length
of their pool, stopping again and again with his hand on the
curb to rest. he climbed up the ladder and wondered if he had
the strength to get home. he had done what he wanted, he
had swum the county, but he was so stupeﬁed with exhaustion
that  his  triumph  seemed  vague.  stooped,  holding  on  to  the
gateposts for support, he turned up the driveway of his own
house.

the place was dark. was it so late that they had all gone to
bed? had lucinda stayed at the westerhazys’ for s upper? had
the girls joined her there or gone someplace else? hadn’t they
agreed, as they usually did on sunday, to regret all their invita-
tions and stay at home? he tried the garage doors to see what
cars were in but the doors were locked and rust came off the
handles onto his hands. going  toward the house, he saw that
the  force  of  the   th understorm  had  knocked  one  of  the  rain
gutters loose. it hung down over the front door like an um-
brella rib, but it could be ﬁxed in the  morning. the house was
locked, and he thought that the stupid cook or the stupid maid
must have locked the place up  until he remembered that it had
been some time since they had employed a maid or a cook. he
shouted, pounded on the door, tried to force it with his shoul-
der, and then,  looking in at the  windows, saw that the place
was empty.


