


Neville

At first, Neville might seem to be a rather cliched portrait of a
homosexual aesthete: he is physically weak, overly refined, obsessed with male
beauty, and somewhat promiscuous. But Neville is also a great artist--the most
successful artist in the novel. Unlike Louis and Bernard, who also harbor
literary ambitions, Neville centers his life on his relationship to his art, to
the exclusion of most other relationships. This intense purity of focus seems to
make the difference in his success as a poet. From the start, Neville is
disturbed by mess and disorder, continually noticing Bernard's sloppiness of
dress. But Neville's desire for order goes beyond the material realm. For
Neville, life itself is a chaotic mess, and only in art and literature is
perfection attainable. Neville understands this fact clearly after the death of
Percival, whom Neville loves and idealizes. Once Percival is gone, Neville looks
to a series of lovers for a temporary replacement for the intense feelings he
once got from merely watching Percival. In each case, Neville uses his
concentrated if fleeting devotion to the new lover as a source of energy for
writing his poetry. In the end, Neville sees that he has spent an entire
lifetime devoted to the study of love itself.
If Bernard's problem with language is that it is not large enough to
contain reality, Neville's problem is that it is not focused enough to serve his
particular needs. Neville's life is one of concentration and exclusion. He shuts
the world out from his book-lined room, awaiting only the approach of his latest
"one." Neville's need for a focused, polished language to express his meaning is
part of the reason for his disdain for Dr. Crane and for conventional religion.
For Neville, the headmaster is a pompous fool, mouthing empty phrases, and most
religion is little more than a collection of such insincere words. Beyond the
platitudes of the sermons he hears, Neville also sees Christianity as a
sad, death-obsessed religion and prefers the pagan Greeks and
Romans for what he sees as their love of life and pleasure in this
world.
