 

white noise


i


1

waves and radiation


the station wagons arrived at noon, a long shining line that coursed through the west campus. in single
file they eased around the orange i-beam sculpture and moved toward the dormitories. the roofs of the
station  wagons  were  loaded  down  with  carefully  secured  suitcases  full  of  light  and  heavy  clothing;  with
boxes of blankets, boots and shoes, stationery and books, sheets, pillows, quilts; with rolled-up rugs and
sleeping bags; with bicycles, skis, rucksacks, english and western saddles, inflated rafts. as cars slowed
to a crawl and stopped, students sprang out and raced to  the rear doors to begin removing the objects
inside;  the  stereo  sets,  radios,  personal  computers;  small  refrigerators  and  table  ranges;  the  cartons  of
phonograph  records  and  cassettes;  the  hairdryers  and  styling  irons;  the  tennis  rackets,  soccer  balls,
hockey  and  lacrosse  sticks,  bows  and  arrows;  the  controlled  substances,  the  birth  control  pills  and
devices;  the  junk  food still in shopping  bags--onion-and-garlic chips, nacho  thins, peanut creme patties,
waffelos and kabooms, fruit chews and toffee popcorn; the dum-dum pops, the mystic mints.

i've  witnessed  this  spectacle  every  september  for  twenty-one  years.  it  is  a  brilliant  event,
invariably. the students greet each other with comic cries and gestures of sodden collapse. their summer
has  been  bloated  with  criminal  pleasures,  as  always.  the  parents  stand  sun-dazed  near  their
automobiles, seeing images of themselves in every direction. the conscientious suntans. the well-made
faces and wry looks. they feel a sense of renewal, of communal recognition. the women crisp and alert,
in  diet  trim,  knowing  people's  names.  their  husbands  content  to  measure  out  the  time,  distant  but
ungrudging, accomplished in parenthood, something about them suggesting massive insurance coverage.
this assembly of station wagons, as much as anything they might do in the course of the year, more than
formal liturgies or laws, tells the parents they are a collection of the like-minded and the spiritually akin, a
people, a nation.

i left my office and walked down the hill and into town. there are houses in town with turrets and
two-story porches where people sit in the shade of ancient maples. there are greek revival and gothic
churches.  there  is  an  insane  asylum  with  an  elongated  portico,  ornamented  dormers  and  a  steeply
pitched roof topped by a pineapple finial. babette and i and our children by previous marriages live at the
end of a quiet street in what was once a wooded area with deep ravines. there is an expressway beyond
the backyard now, well below us, and at night as we settle into our brass bed the sparse traffic washes
past, a remote and steady murmur around our sleep, as of dead souls babbling at the edge of a dream.

i  am  chairman  of  the  department  of  hitler  studies  at  the  college-on-the-hill.  i  invented  hitler
studies in north america in march of 1968. it was a cold bright day with intermittent winds out of the east.
when i suggested to the chancellor that we might build a whole department around hitler's life and work,
he was quick to see the possibilities. it was an immediate and electrifying success. the chancellor went
on to serve as adviser to nixon, ford and carter before his death on a ski lift in austria.

at  fourth and elm, cars turn left  for the supermarket. a policewoman crouched inside a boxlike
vehicle patrols the area looking  for cars parked illegally, for  meter violations, lapsed inspection stickers.
on telephone poles all over town there are homemade signs concerning lost dogs and cats, sometimes in
the handwriting of a child.




 9

"it's not the station wagons i wanted to see. what are the people like? do the women wear plaid

"they've grown comfortable with their money," i said. "they genuinely believe they're entitled to it.

"you should have been there," i said to her.
"where?"
"it's the day of the station wagons."
"did i miss it again? you're supposed to remind me."
"they  stretched  all  the  way  down  past  the  music  library  and  onto  the  interstate.  blue,  green,


2

babette  is  tall  and  fairly  ample;  there  is  a  girth  and  heft  to  her.  her  hair  is  a  fanatical  blond  mop,  a
particular tawny hue that used to be called dirty blond. if she were a petite woman, the hair would be too
cute, too mischievous and contrived. size gives her tousled aspect a certain seriousness. ample women
do not plan such things. they lack the guile for conspiracies of the body.





burgundy, brown. they gleamed in the sun like a desert caravan."

"you know i need reminding, jack."

babette, disheveled, has the careless dignity of someone too preoccupied with serious matters to
know  or  care  what  she  looks  like.  not  that  she  is  a  gift-bearer  of  great  things  as  the  world  generally
reckons  them.  she  gathers  and  tends  the  children,  teaches  a  course  in  an  adult  education  program,
belongs to a group of volunteers who read to the blind. once a week she reads to an elderly man named
treadwell who lives on the edge of town. he is known as old man treadwell, as if he were a landmark, a
rock formation or brooding swamp. she reads to him from the national enquirer, the national examiner,
the  national  express,  the  globe,  the  world,  the  star.  the  old  fellow  demands  his  weekly  dose  of  cult
mysteries.  why  deny  him?  the  point  is  that  babette,  whatever  she  is  doing,  makes  me  feel  sweetly
rewarded,  bound  up  with  a  full-souled  woman,  a  lover  of  daylight  and  dense  life,  the  miscellaneous
swarming  air  of  families.  i  watch  her  all  the  time  doing  things  in  measured  sequence,  skillfully,  with
seeming ease, unlike my former wives, who had a tendency to feel estranged from the objective world-- a
self-absorbed and high-strung bunch, with ties to the intelligence community.

skirts, cable-knit sweaters? are the men in hacking jackets? what's a hacking jacket?"

this conviction gives them a kind of rude health. they glow a little."





motionless on his tricycle in the backyard.

babette and i do our talking in the kitchen. the kitchen and the bedroom are the major chambers
around  here,  the  power  haunts,  the  sources.  she  and  i  are  alike  in  this,  that  we  regard  the  rest  of  the
house as storage space for furniture, toys, all the unused objects of earlier marriages and different sets of
children,  the  gifts  of  lost  in-laws,  the  hand-me-downs  and  rummages.  things,  boxes.  why  do  these
possessions carry such sorrowful weight? there is a darkness attached to them, a foreboding. they make
me wary not of personal failure and defeat but of something more general, something large in scope and
content.

she  came  in  with  wilder  and  seated  him  on  the  kitchen  counter.  denise  and  steffie  came
downstairs  and  we  talked  about  the  school  supplies  they  would  need.  soon  it  was  time  for  lunch.  we
entered a period of chaos and noise. we milled about, bickered a little, dropped utensils. finally we were
all satisfied with what we'd been able to snatch from the cupboards and refrigerator or swipe from each
other and we began quietly plastering mustard or mayonnaise on our brightly colored food. the mood was
one of deadly serious anticipation, a reward hard-won. the table was crowded and babette and denise
elbowed each other twice, although neither spoke. wilder was still seated on the counter surrounded by
open cartons, crumpled tinfoil, shiny bags of potato chips, bowls of pasty substances covered with plastic
wrap, flip-top rings and twist ties, individually wrapped slices of orange cheese. heinrich came in, studied
the scene carefully, my only son, then walked out the back door and disappeared.

wheat germ."



"i have trouble imagining death at that income level," she said.
"maybe there is no death as we know it. just documents changing hands."
"not that we don't have a station wagon ourselves."
"it's small, it's metallic gray, it has one whole rusted door."
"where is wilder?" she said, routinely panic-stricken, calling out to the child, one of hers, sitting

"this  isn't  the  lunch  i'd  planned  for  myself,"  babette  said.  "i  was  seriously  thinking  yogurt  and

"where have we heard that before?" denise said.
"probably right here," steffie said.



10

"it takes up half the kitchen."
"but she throws it away before she eats it because it goes bad," denise said. "so then she starts

"wherever you look," steffie said, "there it is."
"she feels guilty if she doesn't buy it, she feels guilty if she buys it and doesn't eat it, she feels

the smoke alarm went off in the hallway upstairs, either to 'et us know the battery had just died or

"she keeps buying that stuff."
"but she never eats it," steffie said.
"because she thinks if she keeps buying it, she'll have to eat it just to get rid of it. it's like she's




trying to trick herself."


the whole thing all over again."


guilty when she sees it in the fridge, she feels guilty when she throws it away."
"it's like she smokes but she doesn't," steffie said.


denise was eleven, a hard-nosed kid.  she led a  more or less daily protest against those of her
mother's habits that struck her as wasteful or dangerous. i defended babette. i told her i was the one who
needed  to  show  discipline  in  matters  of  diet.  i  reminded  her  how  much  i  liked  the  way  she  looked.  i
suggested there was an honesty inherent in bulkiness if it is just the right amount. people trust a certain
amount of bulk in others.

but she was not happy with her hips and thighs, walked at a rapid clip, ran up the stadium steps at
the  neoclassical  high  school.  she  said  i  made  virtues  of  her  flaws  because  it  was  my  nature  to  shelter
loved ones from the truth. something lurked inside the truth, she said.

because the house was on fire. we finished our lunch in silence.


3

department heads wear academic robes at the college-on-the-hill. not grand sweeping full-length affairs
but sleeveless tunics puckered at the shoulders. i like the idea. i like clearing my arm from the folds of the
garment  to  look  at  my  watch.  the  simple  act  of  checking  the  time  is  transformed  by  this  flourish.
decorative  gestures  add  romance  to  a  life.  idling  students  may  see  time  itself  as  a  complex
embellishment,  a  romance  of  human  consciousness,  as  they  witness  the  chairman  walking  across
campus, crook'd arm emerging from his medieval robe, the digital watch blinking in late summer dusk. the
robe is black, of course, and goes with almost anything.

there is no hitler building as such. we are quartered in centenary hall, a dark brick structure we
share with  the popular culture department, known officially as american environments. a curious group.
the  teaching  staff  is  composed  almost  solely  of  new  york  émigrés,  smart,  thuggish,  movie-mad,  trivia-
crazed.  they  are  here  to  decipher  the  natural  language  of  the  culture,  to  make  a  formal  method  of  the
shiny  pleasures  they'd  known  in  their  europe-shadowed  childhoods--an  aristotelianism  of  bubble  gum
wrappers  and  detergent  jingles.  the  department  head  is  alfonse  (fast  food)  stompanato,  a  broad-
chested glowering man whose collection of prewar soda pop bottles is on permanent display in an alcove.
all  his  teachers  are  male,  wear  rumpled  clothes,  need  haircuts, cough into  their armpits. together they
look like teamster officials assembled to identify the body of a mutilated colleague. the impression is one
of pervasive bitterness, suspicion and intrigue.

an  exception  to  some  of  the  above  is  murray  jay  siskind,  an  ex-sportswriter  who  asked  me  to
have lunch with him in the dining room, where the institutional odor of vaguely defined food aroused in me
an  obscure  and  gloomy  memory.  murray  was  new  to  the  hill,  a  stoop-shouldered  man  with  little  round
glasses and an amish beard. he was a visiting lecturer on living icons and seemed embarrassed by what
he'd gleaned so far from his colleagues in popular culture.

but there are full professors in this place who read nothing but cereal boxes."
"it's the only avant-garde we've got."


"not that i'm complaining. i like it here. i'm totally enamored of this place. a small-town setting. i
want to be free of cities and sexual entanglements. heat. this is what cities mean to me. you get off the
train and walk out of the station and you are hit with the full blast. the heat of air, traffic and people. the
heat of food and sex. the heat of tall buildings. the heat that floats out of the subways and the tunnels.
it's always fifteen degrees hotter in the cities. heat rises from the sidewalks and falls from the poisoned
sky.  the  buses  breathe  heat.  heat  emanates  from  crowds  of  shoppers  and  office  workers.  the  entire
infrastructure is based on heat, desperately uses up heat, breeds more heat. the eventual heat death of

"i understand the music, i understand the movies, i even see how comic books can tell us things.

 11

the universe that scientists love to talk about is already well underway and you can feel it happening all
around you in any large or medium-sized city. heat and wetness."
"where are you living, murray?"


"in a rooming house. i'm totally captivated and intrigued. it's a gorgeous old crumbling house near
the  insane  asylum.  seven  or  eight  boarders,  more  or  less  permanent  except  for  me.  a  woman  who
harbors a terrible secret. a man with a haunted look. a man who never comes out of his room. a woman
who stands by the letter box for hours, waiting for something that never seems to arrive. a man with no
past. a woman with a past. there is a smell about the place of unhappy lives in the movies that i really
respond to."
"which one are you?" i said.

"i'm the jew. what else would i be?"


there was something touching about the fact that murray was dressed almost totally in corduroy. i
had  the  feeling  that  since  the  age  of  eleven  in  his  crowded  plot  of  concrete  he'd  associated  this  sturdy
fabric with higher learning in some impossibly distant and tree-shaded place.
"i can't help being happy in a town called blacksmith," he said. "i'm here to avoid situations. cities

are full of situations, sexually cunning people. there are parts of my body i no longer encourage women
to handle freely. i was in a situation with a woman in detroit. she needed my semen in a divorce suit. the
irony is that i love women. i fall apart at the sight of long legs, striding, briskly, as a breeze carries up from
the river, on a weekday, in the play of morning light. the second irony is that it's not the bodies of women
that  i  ultimately  crave  but  their  minds.  the  mind  of  a  woman.  the  delicate  chambering  and  massive
unidirectional  flow,  like  a  physics  experiment.  what  fun  it  is  to  talk  to  an  intelligent  woman  wearing
stockings  as  she  crosses  her  legs.  that  little  staticky  sound  of  rustling  nylon  can  make  me  happy  on
several levels. the third and related irony is that it's the most complex and neurotic and difficult women
that i am invariably drawn to. i like simple men and complicated women."

murray's hair was tight and heavy-looking. he had dense brows, wisps of hair curling up the sides
of his neck. the small stiff beard, confined to his chin and unaccompanied by a  mustache, seemed an
optional component, to be stuck on or removed as circumstances warranted.
"what kind of lectures do you plan giving?"


"that's exactly what  i want  to talk to you about," he said. "you've established a wonderful thing
here  with  hitler.  you  created  it,  you  nurtured  it,  you  made  it  your  own.  nobody  on  the  faculty  of  any
college or university in this part of the country can so much as utter the word hitler without a nod in your
direction,  literally  or  metaphorically.  this  is  the  center,  the  unquestioned  source.  he  is  now  your  hitler,
gladney's hitler.  it  must be deeply satisfying  for you.  the college is internationally known as a result of
hitler  studies.  it  has  an  identity,  a  sense  of  achievement.  you've  evolved  an  entire  system  around  this
figure, a structure with countless substructures and interrelated fields of study, a history within history.  i
marvel at the effort. it was masterful, shrewd and stunningly preemptive. it's what i want to do with elvis."


several days later murray asked me about a tourist attraction known as the most photographed
barn in  america.  we drove  twenty-two  miles into the  country around  farmington. there were  meadows
and apple orchards. white fences trailed through the rolling fields. soon the signs started appearing. the
most photographed barn in america. we counted five signs before we reached the site. there
were forty cars and  a tour bus in the makeshift lot.  we walked along a cowpath to the slightly elevated
spot set  aside  for viewing and photographing.  all  the  people had cameras; some had  tripods,  telephoto
lenses, filter kits. a man in a booth sold postcards and slides--pictures of the barn taken from the elevated
spot.  we  stood  near  a  grove  of  trees  and  watched  the  photographers.  murray  maintained  a  prolonged
silence, occasionally scrawling some notes in a little book.





aura. can you feel it, jack? an accumulation of nameless energies."
there was an extended silence. the man in the booth sold postcards and slides.

"being here is a kind of spiritual surrender. we see only what the others see. the thousands who

were  here  in  the  past,  those  who  will  come  in  the  future.  we've  agreed  to  be  part  of  a  collective
perception. this literally colors our vision. a religious experience in a way, like all tourism."



"no one sees the barn," he said finally.
a long silence followed.
"once you've seen the signs about the barn, it becomes impossible to see the barn."
he fell silent once more. people with cameras left the elevated site, replaced at once by others.
"we're not here to capture an image, we're here to maintain one. every photograph reinforces the

another silence ensued.
"they are taking pictures of taking pictures," he said.



12

he did not speak for a while. we listened to the incessant clicking of shutter release buttons, the

he seemed immensely pleased by this.


rustling crank of levers that advanced the film.

"what was the barn like before it was photographed?" he said. "what did it look like, how was it
different from other barns, how was it similar to other barns? we can't answer these questions because
we've read the. signs, seen the people snapping the pictures. we can't get outside the aura. we're part of
the aura. we're here, we're now."



4

when  times  are  bad,  people  feel  compelled  to  overeat.  blacksmith  is  full  of  obese  adults  and  children,
baggy-pantsed, short-legged, waddling. they struggle to emerge from compact cars; they don sweatsuits
and run in families across the landscape;  they walk down the street with food in  their  faces; they eat in
stores, cars, parking lots, on bus lines and movie lines, under the stately trees.

only the elderly seem exempt  from the fever  of eating. if  they are sometimes absent from  their
own words and gestures, they are also slim and healthy-looking, the women carefully groomed, the men
purposeful and well dressed, selecting shopping carts from the line outside the supermarket.
i crossed the high school lawn and walked to the rear of the building and toward the small open

stadium. babette was running up the stadium steps. i sat across the field in the first row of stone seats.
the sky was full of streaking clouds. when she reached the top of the stadium she stopped and paused,
putting her hands to the high parapet and leaning into it to rest diagonally. then she turned and walked
back down, breasts chugging. the wind rippled her oversized suit. she walked with her hands on her hips,
fingers spread. her face was tilted up, catching the cool air, and she didn't see me. when she reached the
bottom step she turned to face the seats and did some kind of neck stretching exercise. then she started
running up the steps.

three times she ascended the steps, walked slowly down. there was no one around. she worked
hard, hair floating, legs and shoulders working. every time she reached the top she leaned into the wall,
head  down,  upper  body  throbbing.  after  the  last  descent  i  met  her  at  the  edge  of  the  playing  field  and
embraced her, putting my hands inside the sweatband of her gray cotton pants. a small plane appeared
over the trees. babette was moist and warm, emitting a creaturely hum.
she runs, she shovels snow, she caulks the tub and sink. she plays word games with wilder and

reads erotic classics aloud in bed at night. what do i do? i twirl the garbage bags and twist-tie them, swim
laps in the college pool.  when i go walking,  joggers  come  up soundlessly behind  me, appearing at my
side, making me jump in idiotic fright. babette talks to dogs and cats. i see colored spots out of the corner
of my right eye. she plans ski trips that we never take, her face bright with excitement. i walk up the hill to
school, noting the whitewashed stones that line the driveways of newer homes.
who will die first?


this  question  comes  up  from  time  to  time,  like  where  are  the  car  keys.  it  ends  a  sentence,
prolongs a glance between us. i wonder if the thought itself is part of the nature of physical love, a reverse
darwinism that awards sadness and fear to the survivor. or is it some inert element in the air we breathe,
a rare thing like neon, with a melting point, an atomic weight? i held her in my arms on the cinder track.
kids came running our way, thirty girls in bright shorts, an improbable bobbing mass. the eager breathing,
the  overlapping  rhythms  of  their  footfalls.  sometimes  i  think  our  love  is  inexperienced.  the  question  of
dying becomes a wise reminder. it cures us of our innocence of the future. simple things are doomed, or
is that a superstition? we watched the girls come round again. they were strung out now, with faces and
particular gaits, almost weightless in their craving, able to land lightly.











the airport marriott, the downtown travelodge, the sheraton inn and conference center.
on our way home i said, "bee wants to visit at christmas. we can put her in with steffie."
"do they know each other?"
'they met at disney world. it'll be all right."
"when were you in los angeles?"
"you mean anaheim."
"when were you in anaheim?"
"you mean orlando. it's almost three years now."
"where was i?" she said.
my  daughter  bee,  from  my  marriage  to  tweedy  browner,  was  just  starting  seventh  grade  in  a

 13

it was my own formal custom on fridays, after an evening in front of the tv set, to read deeply in

washington suburb and was having trouble readjusting to life in the states after two years in south korea.
she  took  taxis  to  school,  made  phone  calls  to  friends  in  seoul  and  tokyo.  abroad  she'd  wanted  to  eat
ketchup sandwiches with trix sticks. now she cooked fierce sizzling meals of scallion bushes and baby
shrimp, monopolizing tweedy's restaurant-quality range.

that  night,  a  friday,  we  ordered  chinese  food  and  watched  television  together,  the  six  of  us.
babette  had  made  it  a  rule.  she  seemed  to  think  that  if  kids  watched  television  one  night  a  week  with
parents or stepparents, the effect would be to de-glamorize the medium in their eyes, make it wholesome
domestic  sport.  its  narcotic  undertow  and  eerie  diseased  brain-sucking  power  would  be  gradually
reduced. i felt vaguely slighted by this reasoning. the evening in fact was a subtle form of punishment for
us  all.  heinrich  sat  silent  over  his  egg  rolls.  steffie  became  upset  every  time  something  shameful  or
humiliating  seemed  about  to  happen  to  someone  on  the  screen.  she  had  a  vast  capacity  for  being
embarrassed on other people's behalf. often she would leave the room until denise signaled to her that
the scene was over. denise used these occasions to counsel the younger girl on toughness, the need to
be mean in the world, thick-skinned.

hitler well into the night.

on one such night i got into bed next to babette and told her how the chancellor had advised me,
back  in  1968,  to  do  something  about  my  name  and  appearance  if  i  wanted  to  be  taken  seriously  as  a
hitler innovator. jack gladney would not do, he said, and asked me what other names i might have at my
disposal. we  finally agreed  that i should  invent an extra initial and call  myself j. a.  k. gladney, a tag  i
wore like a borrowed suit.

the chancellor warned against what he called my tendency to make a feeble presentation of self.
he strongly suggested i gain weight. he wanted me to "grow out" into hitler. he himself was tall, paunchy,
ruddy, jowly, bigfooted and dull. a formidable combination. i had the advantages of substantial height, big
hands,  big  feet,  but  badly  needed  bulk,  or  so  he  believed--  an  air  of  unhealthy  excess,  of  padding  and
exaggeration, hulking massive-ness. if i could become more ugly, he seemed to be suggesting, it would
help my career enormously.
so  hitler  gave  me  something  to  grow  into  and  develop  toward,  tentative  as  i  have  sometimes

been  in  the  effort.  the  glasses  with  thick  black  heavy  frames  and  dark  lenses  were  my  own  idea,  an
alternative to the bushy beard that my wife of the period didn't want me to grow. babette said she liked the
series  j.  a.  k.  and  didn't  think  it  was  attention-getting  in  a  cheap  sense.  to  her  it  intimated  dignity,
significance and prestige.



5

let's enjoy these aimless days while we can, i told myself, i fearing some kind of deft acceleration.

listen when she got to mine, although i think i wanted to listen, i think i sought some clues.

and think about our spines."

that night, seconds after going to sleep, i seemed to fall through myself, a shallow heart-stopping
plunge. jarred awake, i stared into the dark, realizing i'd experienced the more or less normal muscular
contraction  known  as  the  myoclonic  jerk.  is  this  what  it's  like,  abrupt,  peremptory?  shouldn't  death,  i
thought, be a swan dive, graceful, white-winged and smooth, leaving the surface undisturbed?
blue jeans tumbled in the dryer.


we  ran  into  murray  jay  siskind  at  the  supermarket.  his  basket  held  generic  food  and  drink,
nonbrand  items  in  plain  white  packages  with  simple  labeling.  there  was  a  white  can  labeled  canned
peaches.  there  was  a  white  package  of  bacon  without  a  plastic  window  for  viewing  a  representative
slice. a jar of roasted nuts had a white wrapper bearing the words irregular peanuts. murray kept
nodding to babette as i introduced them.

'this  is  the  new  austerity,"  he  said.  "flavorless  packaging.  it  appeals  to  me.  i  feel  i'm  not  only
saving money but contributing  to some kind of spiritual consensus.  it's like world war hi.  everything is
white. they'll take our bright colors away and use them in the war effort."



he was staring into babette's eyes, picking up items from our cart and smelling them.
"i've bought these peanuts before. they're round, cubical, pockmarked, seamed. broken peanuts.

i am the false character that follows the name around.

at  breakfast,  babette  read  all  our  horoscopes  aloud,  using  her  storytelling  voice.  i  tried  not  to

after dinner, on my way upstairs, i heard the tv say: "let's sit half lotus



14

"your  wife's  hair  is  a  living  wonder,"  murray  said,  looking  closely  into  my  face  as  if  to

"actually she falls apart. she fell apart when her mother died."
"who wouldn't?"
"she fell apart when steffie called from camp with a broken bone in her hand. we had to drive all

"yes, it is," i said.
"she has important hair."
"i think i know what you mean."
"i hope you appreciate that woman."
"absolutely."
"because a woman like that doesn't just happen."
"i know it."
"she  must be good with children.  more than  that, i'll  bet she's great  to have around  in a family

a lot of dust at the bottom of the jar. but they taste good. most of all i like the packages themselves. you
were right, jack. this is the last avant-garde. bold new forms. the power to shock."

a woman fell into a rack of paperback books at the front of the store. a heavyset man emerged
from the raised cubicle in the far corner and moved warily toward her, head tilted to get a clearer sightline.
a  checkout  girl  said,  "leon,  parsley,"  and  he  answered  as  he  approached  the  fallen  woman,  "seventy-
nine." his breast pocket was crammed with felt-tip pens.
"so then you cook at the rooming house," babette said.


"my  room  is  zoned  for  a  hot  plate.  i'm  happy  there.  i  read  the  tv  listings,  i  read  the  ads  in
ufologist today. i want to immerse myself in american magic and dread. my seminar is going well. the
students  are  bright  and  responsive.  they  ask  questions  and  i  answer  them.  they  jot  down  notes  as  i
speak. it's quite a surprise in my life."

he picked up our bottle of extra-strength pain reliever and sniffed along the rim of the child-proof
cap. he smelled our honeydew melons, our bottles of club soda and ginger ale. babette went down the
frozen food aisle, an area my doctor had advised me to stay out of.

communicate a deepening respect for me based on this new information.








tragedy. she'd be the type to take control, show strength and affirmation."



night. i found myself on a lumber company road. babette weeping."
"her daughter, far away, among strangers, in pain. who wouldn't?"

"not her daughter. my daughter."

"not even her own daughter."

"no."

"extraordinary. i have to love it."


the three of us left together, trying to maneuver our shopping carts between the paperback books
scattered across the entrance.  murray wheeled one of our carts into the parking lot and then helped us
heave and push all our double-bagged merchandise into the back of the station wagon. cars entered and
exited. the policewoman in her zippered minicab scouted the area for red flags on the parking meters. we
added murray's single lightweight bag of white items to our load and headed across elm in the direction of
his rooming house. it seemed to me that babette and i, in the mass and variety of our purchases, in the
sheer  plenitude  those  crowded  bags  suggested,  the  weight  and  size  and  number,  the  familiar  package
designs  and  vivid  lettering,  the  giant  sizes,  the  family  bargain  packs  with  day-glo  sale  stickers,  in  the
sense  of  replenishment  we  felt,  the  sense  of  well-being,  the  security  and  contentment  these  products
brought to some snug home in our souls--it seemed we had achieved a fullness of being that is not known
to people who need less, expect less, who plan their lives around lonely walks in the evening.


intimate."

murray is able to produce a look that is sneaky and frank at the same time. it is a look that gives
equal  credence  to  disaster  and  lecherous  success.  he  says  that  in  the  old  days  of  his  urban
entanglements he believed there was only one way to seduce a woman, with clear and open desire. he
took  pains  to  avoid  self-depreciation,  self-mockery,  ambiguity,  irony,  subtlety,  vulnerability,  a  civilized
world-weariness and a tragic sense of history-- the very things, he says, that are most natural to him. of
these  he  has  allowed  only  one  element,  vulnerability,  to  insert  itself  gradually  into  his  program  of
straightforward lust. he is  trying to develop  a vulnerability that women will find attractive. he works at it
consciously, like a man in a gym with weights and a mirror. but his efforts so far have produced only this
half sneaky look, sheepish and wheedling.


murray took babette's hand on leaving.
"i'd  ask  you  to  visit  my  room  but  it's  too  small  for  two  people  unless  they're  prepared  to  be

he thanked us for the lift. we watched him walk toward the lopsided porch, propped with cinder

 15

"look at the windshield," i said. "is that rain or isn't it?"
"i'm only telling you what they said."
"just  because  it's  on  the  radio  doesn't  mean  we  have  to  suspend  belief  in  the  evidence  of  our

blocks, where a man in a rocker stared into space.
6

heinrich's  hairline  is  beginning  to  recede.  i  wonder  about  this.  did  his  mother  consume  some  kind  of
gene-piercing substance when she was pregnant? am i at fault somehow? have i raised him, unwittingly,
in the vicinity of a chemical dump site, in  the path of  air currents that carry industrial wastes capable of
producing scalp degeneration, glorious sunsets? (people say the sunsets around here were not nearly so
stunning  thirty  or  forty  years  ago.)  man's  guilt  in  history  and  in  the  tides  of  his  own  blood  has  been
complicated bytechnology, the daily seeping falsehearted death.

the  boy  is  fourteen,  often  evasive  and  moody,  at  other  times  disturbingly  compliant.  i  have  a
sense  that  his  ready  yielding  to  our  wishes  and  demands  is  a  private  weapon  of  reproach.  babette  is
afraid he will end up in a barricaded room, spraying hundreds of rounds of automatic fire across an empty
mall before the swat teams come for him with their  heavy-barreled weapons, their bullhorns and body
armor.
"it's going to rain tonight."

"it's raining now," i said.

"the radio said tonight."


i  drove  him  to  school  on  his  first  day  back  after  a  sore  throat  and  fever.  a  woman  in  a  yellow
slicker held up traffic to let some children cross. i pictured her in a soup commercial taking off her oilskin
hat as she entered the cheerful kitchen where her husband stood over a pot of smoky lobster bisque, a
smallish man with six weeks to live.



senses."
"our senses? our senses are wrong a lot more often than they're right.


this has been proved in the laboratory. don't you know about all those theorems that say nothing
is what it seems? there's no past, present or future outside our own mind. the so-called laws of motion
are a big hoax. even sound can trick the mind. just because you don't hear a sound doesn't mean it's not
out there. dogs can hear it. other animals. and i'm sure there are sounds even dogs can't hear. but they
exist in the air, in waves. maybe they never stop. high, high, high-pitched. coming from somewhere."
"is it raining," i said, "or isn't it?"

"i wouldn't want to have to say."

"what if someone held a gun to your head?"

"who, you?"


"someone. a man in a trenchcoat and smoky glasses. he holds a gun to your head and says, 'is it
raining or isn't it? all you have to do is tell the truth and i'll put away my gun and take the next flight out of
here.'"

"what truth does he want? does he want the truth of  someone  traveling at almost the speed of
light in another galaxy? does he want the truth of someone in orbit around a neutron star? maybe if these
people could see us through a telescope we might look like we were two feet two inches tall and it might
be raining yesterday instead of today."
"he's holding the gun to your head. he wants your truth."


"what  good  is  my  truth?  my  truth  means  nothing.  what  if  this  guy  with  the  gun  comes  from  a
planet in a whole different solar system?  what we call rain he calls soap. what we call apples he calls
rain. so what am i supposed to tell him?"




raining now if your so-called 'now' becomes 'then' as so on as i say it?"



minutes that you choose to respond to the question?"

then i think that's the trouble with this discussion."

"his name is frank j. smalley and he comes from st. louis."
"he wants to know if it's raining now, at this very minute?"
"here and now. that's right."
"is there such a thing as now? 'now' comes and goes as soon as you say it. how can i say it's

"you said there was no past, present, or future."
"only in our verbs. that's the only place we find it."
"rain  is  a  noun.  is  there  rain  here,  in  this  precise  locality,  at  whatever  time  within  the  next  two

"if  you  want  to  talk  about  this  precise  locality  while  you're  in  a  vehicle  that's  obviously  moving,



16

"just give me an answer, okay, heinrich?"
"the best i could do is make a guess."
"either it's raining or it isn't," i said.
"exactly. that's my whole point. you'd be guessing. six of one, half dozen of the other."
"but you see it's raining."
"you  see  the  sun  moving  across  the  sky.  but  is  the  sun  moving  across  the  sky  or  is  the  earth







turning?"
"i don't accept the analogy."


"you're so sure that's rain. how do you know it's not sulfuric acid from factories across the river?
how do you know it's not fallout from a war in china? you want an answer here and now. can you prove,
here  and  now,  that  this  stuff  is  rain?  how  do  i  know  that  what  you  call  rain  is  really  rain?  what  is  rain
anyway?"
"it's the stuff that falls from the sky and gets you what is called wet."

"i'm not wet. are you wet?"

"all right," i said. "very good."

"no, seriously, are you wet?"

"first-rate," i told him. "a victory for uncertainty, randomness and chaos. science's finest hour."

"be sarcastic."

"the sophists and the hairsplitters enjoy their finest hour."

"go ahead, be sarcastic, i don't care."


heinrich's  mother  lives  in  an  ashram  now.  she  has  taken  the  name  mother  devi  and  runs  the
business  end  of  things.  the  ashram  is  located  on  the  outskirts  of  the  former  copper-smelting  town  of
tubb, montana, now called dharamsalapur. the usual rumors abound of sexual freedom, sexual slavery,
drugs, nudity,  mind control, poor hygiene,  tax evasion, monkey-worship, torture, prolonged  and hideous
death.

i  watched  him  walk  through  the  downpour  to  the  school  entrance.  he  moved  with  deliberate
slowness, taking off his camouflage cap ten yards from the doorway. at such moments i find i love him
with an animal desperation, a need to take him under my coat and crush him to my chest, keep him there,
protect  him.  he  seems  to  bring  a  danger  to  him.  it  collects  in  the  air,  follows  him  from  room  to  room.
babette bakes his favorite cookies. we watch him at his desk, an unpainted table covered with books and
magazines. he works well into the night, plotting chess moves in a game he plays by mail with a convicted
killer in the penitentiary.

it was warm and bright the next day and students on the hill sat on lawns and in dorm windows,
playing their tapes, sunbathing. the air was a reverie of wistful summer things, the last languorous day, a
chance  to  go  bare  limbed  once  more,  smell  the  mown  clover.  i  went  into  the  arts  duplex,  our  newest
building,  a  winged  affair  with  a  facade  of  anodized  aluminum,  sea-green,  cloud-catching.  on  the  lower
level  was  the  movie  theater,  a  sloped  and  dark-carpeted  space  with  two  hundred  plush  seats.  i  sat  in
shallow light at the end of the first row and waited for my seniors to arrive.

they  were  all  hitler  majors,  members  of  the  only  class  i  still  taught,  advanced  nazism,  three
hours a week, restricted to qualified seniors, a course of study designed to cultivate historical perspective,
theoretical  rigor  and  mature  insight  into  the  continuing  mass  appeal  of  fascist  tyranny,  with  special
emphasis on parades, rallies and uniforms, three credits, written reports.

every semester i arranged for a screening of background footage. this consisted of propaganda
films, scenes shot at party congresses, outtakes from mystical epics featuring parades of gymnasts and
mountaineers--a  collection  i'd  edited  into  an  impressionistic  eighty-minute  documentary.  crowd  scenes
predominated. close-up jostled shots of thousands of people outside a stadium after a goebbels speech,
people  surging,  massing,  bursting  through  the  traffic.  halls  hung  with  swastika  banners,  with  mortuary
wreaths and death's-head insignia. ranks of thousands of flagbearers arrayed before columns of frozen
light, a hundred and thirty antiaircraft searchlights aimed straight up--a scene that resembled a geometric
longing,  the  formal  notation  of  some  powerful  mass  desire.  there  was  no  narrative  voice.  only  chants,
songs, arias, speeches, cries, cheers, accusations, shrieks.

entranceway.
they came in out of the sun in their poplin walk shorts and limited edition t-shirts, in their easy-

care knits, their polo styling and rugby stripes. i watched them take their seats, noting the subdued and
reverent  air,  the  uncertain  anticipation.  some  had  notebooks  and  pencil  lights;  some  carried  lecture
material in bright binders. there were whispers, rustling paper, the knocking sound of seats dropping as
one by one the students settled in. i leaned against the front of the apron, waiting for the last few to enter,

i  got  to  my  feet  and  took  up  a  position  at  the  front  of  the  theater,  middle  aisle,  facing  the

 17

is this true? why did i say it? what does it mean?

for someone to seal the doors against our voluptuous summer day.
soon there was a  hush. it  was  time  for  me to deliver the introductory remarks. i let  the silence

deepen  for  a  moment,  then  cleared  my  arms  from  the  folds  of  the  academic  robe  in  order  to  gesture
freely.

when the showing ended, someone asked about the plot to kill hitler. the discussion moved to
plots in general. i found myself saying to the assembled he ads, "all plots tend to move deathward. this is
the  nature  of  plots.  political  plots,  terrorist  plots,  lovers'  plots,  narrative  plots,  plots  that  are  part  of
children's  games.  we  edge  nearer  death  every  time  we  plot.  it  is  like  a  contract  that  all  must  sign,  the
plotters as well as those who are the targets of the plot."



7

two nights a week babette goes  to the congregational church at the other end of town and lectures to
adults in the basement on correct posture. basically she is teaching them how to stand, sit and walk. most
of her students are old. it isn't clear to me why they want to improve their posture. we seem to believe it is
possible to ward off death by following rules of good grooming. sometimes i go with my wife to the church
basement  and  watch  her  stand,  turn,  assume  various  heroic  poses,  gesture  gracefully.  she  makes
references  to  yoga,  kendo,  trance-walking.  she  talks  of  sufi  dervishes,  sherpa  mountaineers.  the  old
folks  nod  and  listen.  nothing  is  foreign,  nothing  too  remote  to  apply.  i  am  always  surprised  at  their
acceptance and trust, the sweetness of their belief. nothing is too doubtful to be of use to them as they
seek to redeem their bodies from a lifetime of bad posture. it is the end of skepticism.

we walked home under a marigold moon. our house looked old and wan at the end of the street,
the porch light shining on a molded plastic tricycle, a stack of three-hour colored-flame sawdust and wax
logs.  denise  was  doing  her  homework  in  the  kitchen,  keeping  an  eye  on  wilder,  who  had  wandered
downstairs  to  sit  on  the  floor  and  stare  through  the  oven  window.  silence  in  the  halls,  shadows  on  the
sloping lawn. we closed the door and disrobed. the bed was a mess. magazines, curtain rods, a child's
sooty  sock.  babette  hummed  something  from  a  broadway  show,  putting  the  rods  in  a  corner.  we
embraced,  fell  sideways  to  the  bed  in  a  controlled  way,  then  repositioned  ourselves,  bathing  in  each
other's flesh, trying to kick the sheets off our ankles. her body had a number of long hollows, places the
hand might stop to solve in the dark, tempo-slowing places.














i'm your wife. do you want me to read to you?"




read to old man treadwell, it's not because i find those tabloids stimulating."






we believed something lived in the basement.
"what do you want to do?" she said.
"whatever you want to do."
"i want to do whatever's best for you."
"what's best for me is to please you," i said.
"i want to make you happy, jack."
"i'm happy when i'm pleasing you."
"i just want to do what you want to do."
"i want to do whatever's best for you."
"but you please me by letting me please you," she said.
"as the male partner i think it's my responsibility to please."
"i'm not sure whether that's a sensitive caring statement or a sexist remark."
"is it wrong for the man to be considerate toward his partner?"
"i'm your partner when we play tennis, which we ought to start doing again, by the way. otherwise

"first-rate."
"i know you like me to read sexy stuff."
"i thought you liked it too."
"isn't it basically  the  person being read to who  derives the benefit and  the satisfaction?  when  i

"treadwell's blind, i'm not. i thought you liked to read erotic passages."
"if it pleases you, then i like to do it."
"but it has to please you too, baba. otherwise how would i feel?"
"it pleases me that you enjoy my reading."
"i get  the  feeling a burden  is being shifted back and forth. the burden of being the one who is



18

"i want to read, jack. honestly."
"are you totally and completely sure? because if you're not, we absolutely won't."
someone turned on the tv set at the end of the hall, and a woman's voice said: "if it breaks easily

"agreed."
"'i entered her and began to thrust.'"
"i'm in total agreement," i said.
"'enter me, enter me, yes, yes.'"
"silly usage, absolutely."
"'insert yourself, rex. i want you inside me, entering hard, entering deep, yes, now, oh.'"
i  began  to  feel  an  erection  stirring.  how  stupid  and  out  of  context.  babette  laughed  at  her  own

pleased."



into pieces, it is called shale. when wet, it smells like clay."
we listened to the gently plummeting stream of nighttime traffic.


i said, "pick your century. do you want to read about etruscan slave girls, georgian rakes? i think
we  have  some  literature  on  flagellation  brothels.  what  about  the  middle  ages?  we  have  incubi  and
succubi. nuns galore."



what makes it sexy?"
"a tautness, a suspense. first-rate. i will choose."

"i will read," she said. "but i don't want you to choose anything that has men inside women, quote-

quote, or men entering women. 'i entered her.' 'he entered me.' we're not lobbies or elevators. 'i wanted
him inside me,' as if he could crawl completely in, sign the register, sleep, eat, so forth. can we agree on
that? i don't care what these people do as long as they don't enter or get entered."







lines. the tv said: "until florida surgeons attached an artificial flipper."

babette and i tell each other everything. i have told everything, such as it was at the time, to each
of  my  wives.  there  is  more  to  tell,  of  course,  as  marriages  accumulate.  but  when  i  say  i  believe  in
complete disclosure i don't mean it cheaply, as anecdotal sport or shallow revelation. it is a form of self-
renewal and a gesture of custodial trust. love helps us develop an identity secure enough to allow itself to
be placed in another's care and protection. babette and i have turned our lives for each other's thoughtful
regard,  turned  them  in  the  moonlight  in  our  pale  hands,  spoken  deep  into  the  night  about  fathers  and
mothers, childhood, friendships, awakenings, old loves, old fears (except fear of death). no detail must be
left out, not even a dog with ticks or a neighbor's boy who ate an insect on a dare. the smell of pantries,
the  sense  of  empty  afternoons,  the  feel  of  things  as  they  rained  across  our  skin,  things  as  facts  and
passions, the feel of pain, loss, disappointment, breathless delight. in these night recitations we create a
space between things as we felt them at the time and as we speak them now. this is the space reserved
for irony, sympathy and fond amusement, the means by which we rescue ourselves from the past.

i  decided  on  the  twentieth  century.  i  put  on  my  bathrobe  and  went  down  the  hall  to  heinrich's
room  to  find  a  trashy  magazine  babette  might  read  from,  the  type  that  features  letters  from  readers
detailing  their sexual experiences.  this struck  me as  one of  the  few  things  the  modern imagination has
contributed to the history of erotic practices. there is a double fantasy at work in such letters. people write
down  imagined  episodes  and  then  see  them  published  in  a  national  magazine.  which  is  the  greater
stimulation?

wilder was in there watching heinrich do a physics experiment with steel balls and a salad bowl.
heinrich wore a terry cloth robe, a towel around his neck, another towel on his head. he told me to look
downstairs.

in a stack of material i found some family photo albums, one or two of them at least fifty years old.
i took them up to the bedroom. we spent hours going through them, sitting up in bed. children wincing in
the sun, women in sun hats, men shading their eyes from the glare as if the past possessed some quality
of  light  we  no  longer  experience,  a  sunday  dazzle  that  caused  people  in  their  churchgoing  clothes  to
tighten  their  faces and stand at an  angle to  the future, somewhat averted it seemed, wearing  fixed and
fine-drawn smiles, skeptical of something in the nature of the box camera.



8

"whatever's best for you."
"i want you to choose. it's sexier that way."
"one person chooses, the other reads. don't we want a balance, a sort of give-and-take? isn't that

who will die first?

 19


my struggle with the german tongue began in mid-october and lasted nearly the full academic year. as
the most prominent figure in hitler studies in north america, i had long tried to conceal the fact that i did
not know german. i could not speak or read it, could not understand the spoken word or begin to put the
simplest  sentence  on  paper.  the  least  of  my  hitler  colleagues  knew  some  german;  others  were  either
fluent in the language or reasonably conversant. no one could major in hitler studies at the college-on-
the-hill without a  minimum of one year of german. i  was living, in short, on  the edge of a landscape of
vast shame.

the  german  tongue.  fleshy,  warped,  spit-spraying,  purplish  and  cruel.  one  eventually  had  to
confront it. wasn't hitler's own struggle to express himself in german the crucial subtext of his massive
ranting autobiography, dictated in a fortress prison in the bavarian hills? grammar and syntax. the man
may have felt himself imprisoned in more ways than one.

i'd made several attempts to learn german, serious probes into origins, structures, roots. i sensed
the deathly power of the language. i wanted to speak it well, use it as a charm, a protective device. the
more i shrank from learning actual words, rules and pronunciation, the more important it seemed that i go
forward. what we are reluctant to touch often seems the very fabric of our salvation. but the basic sounds
defeated  me,  the  harsh  spurting  northernness  of  the  words  and  syllables,  the  command  delivery.
something happened between the back of my tongue and the roof of my mouth that made a mockery of
my attempts to sound german words.
i was determined to try again.


because i'd achieved high professional standing, because my lectures were well attended and my
articles printed in the major journals, because i wore an academic gown and dark glasses day and night
whenever  i  was  on  campus,  because  i  carried  two  hundred  and  thirty  pounds  on  a  six-foot  three-inch
frame and had big hands and feet, i knew my german lessons would have to be secret.

i contacted a man not affiliated with the college, someone murray jay siskind had told me about.
they were fellow boarders in the green-shingled house on middlebrook. the man was in his fifties, a slight
shuffle in his walk. he had thinning hair, a bland face and wore his shirtsleeves rolled up to his forearms,
revealing thermal underwear beneath.

his complexion was of a tone i want to call flesh-colored. howard dunlop was his name. he said
he was a former chiropractor but didn't offer a reason why he was no longer active and didn't say when
he'd learned german, or why, and something in his manner kept me from asking.

we sat in his dark crowded room at the boarding house. an ironing board stood unfolded at the
window.  there  were  chipped  enamel  pots,  trays  of  utensils  set  on  a  dresser.  the  furniture  was  vague,
foundling. at the borders of the room were the elemental things. an exposed radiator, an army-blanketed
cot. dunlop sat at the edge of a straight chair, intoning generalities of grammar. when he switched from
english to german, it was as though a cord had been twisted in his larynx. an abrupt emotion entered his
voice, a scrape and gargle that sounded like the stirring of some beast's ambition. he gaped at me and
gestured,  he  croaked,  he  verged  on  strangulation.  sounds  came  spewing  from  the  base  of  his  tongue,
harsh noises damp with passion. he was only demonstrating certain basic pronunciation patterns but the
transformation in his face and voice made me think he was making a passage between levels of being.
i sat there taking notes.


the  hour  went  quickly.  dunlop  managed  a  scant  shrug  when  i  asked  him  not  to  discuss  the
lessons  with  anyone.  it  occurred  to  me  that  he  was  the  man  murray  had  described  in  his  summary  of
fellow boarders as the one who never comes out of his room.

i  stopped  at  murray's  room  and  asked  him  to  come  home  with  me  for  dinner.  he  put  down  his
copy of american transvestite and slipped into his corduroy jacket. we stopped on the porch long enough
for murray to tell the landlord, who was sitting there, about a dripping faucet in the second-floor bathroom.
the  landlord  was  a  large  florid  man  of  such  robust  and  bursting  health  that  he  seemed  to  be  having  a
heart attack even as we looked on.

"he'll get around to fixing it," murray said, as we set out on foot in the direction of elm. "he fixes
everything eventually. he's very good with all those little tools and fixtures and devices that people in cities
never know the names of. the names of these things are only known in outlying communities, small towns
and rural areas. too bad he's such a bigot."




they?"

"how do you know he's a bigot?"
"people who can fix things are usually bigots."
"what do you mean?"
"think of all the people who've ever come to your house to fix things. they were all bigots, weren't



20

"i don't know."
"they  drove  panel  trucks,  didn't  they,  with  an  extension  ladder  on  the  roof  and  some  kind  of

"we have to boil our water," steffie said.
"why?"
"it said on the radio."
"they're always saying boil your water," babette said. "it's the new thing, like turn your wheel in



plastic charm dangling from the rearview mirror?"
"i don't know, murray."

"it's obvious," he said.

he  asked  me  why  i'd  chosen  this  year  in  particular  to  learn  german,  after  so  many  years  of

slipping past the radar. i told him there was a hitler conference scheduled for next spring at the college-
on-the-hill. three days of lectures, workshops and panels. hitler scholars from seventeen states and nine
foreign countries. actual germans would be in attendance.


at  home  denise  placed  a  moist  bag  of  garbage  in  the  kitchen  compactor.  she  started  up  the
machine.  the  ram  stroked  downward  with  a  dreadful  wrenching  sound,  full  of  eerie  feeling.  children
walked in and out of the kitchen, water dripped in the sink, the washing machine heaved in the entrance
way. murray seemed engrossed in the incidental mesh. whining metal, exploding bottles, plastic smashed
flat. denise listened carefully, making sure the mangling din contained the correct sonic elements, which
meant the machine was operating properly.

can it be?"
babette  came  in  from  running,  her  outfit  soaked  through.  murray  walked  across  the  kitchen  to

shake  her  hand.  she  fell  into  a  chair,  scanned  the  room  for  wilder.  i  watched  denise  make  a  mental
comparison  between  her  mother's  running  clothes  and  the  wet  bag  she'd  dumped  in  the  compactor.  i
could see it in her eyes, a sardonic connection. it was these secondary levels of life, these extrasensory
flashes  and  floating  nuances  of  being,  these  pockets  of  rapport  forming  unexpectedly,  that  made  me
believe we were a magic act, adults and children together, sharing unaccountable things.




the direction of the skid. here comes wilder now. i guess we can eat."

delight, happy and outlandish masks, watching him approach.




9

they  had  to  evacuate  the  grade  school  on  tuesday.  kids  were  getting  headaches  and  eye  irritations,
tasting  metal  in  their  mouths.  a  teacher  rolled  on  the  floor  and  spoke  foreign  languages.  no  one  knew
what  was  wrong.  investigators  said  it  could  be  the  ventilating  system,  the  paint  or  varnish,  the  foam
insulation, the electrical insulation, the cafeteria food, the rays emitted by microcomputers, the asbestos
fireproofing,  the  adhesive  on  shipping  containers,  the  fumes  from  the  chlorinated  pool,  or  perhaps
something deeper, finer-grained, more closely woven into the basic state of things.

denise  and  steffie  stayed  home  that  week  as  men  in  mylex  suits  and  respirator  masks  made
systematic  sweeps  of  the  building  with  infrared  detecting  and  measuring  equipment.  because  mylex  is
itself  a  suspect  material,  the  results  tended  to  be  ambiguous  and  a  second  round  of  more  rigorous
detection had to be scheduled.

the two girls and babette, wilder and i went to the supermarket. minutes after we entered, we ran
into  murray.  this  was  the  fourth  or  fifth  time  i'd  seen  him  in  the  supermarket,  which  was  roughly  the
number  of  times  i'd seen him on campus. he clutched babette by  the left bicep and sidled around her,
appearing to smell her hair.

appreciation of someone who does it well."
"come any time," she said, turning in an effort to find him.


we moved together into the ultra-cool interior. wilder sat in the shopping cart trying to grab items
off  the  shelves  as  we  went  by.  it  occurred  to  me  that  he  was  too  old  and  too  big  to  be  sitting  in
supermarket carts. i also wondered why his vocabulary seemed to be stalled at twenty-five words.

the  small  child  moved  in  a  swaying  gait,  great  head  wagging,  and  his  mother  made  faces  of

"neutrinos go right through the earth," heinrich said into the telephone.
"yes yes yes," said babette.

heinrich said to someone on  the phone, "animals commit incest all the  time. so how unnatural

"a lovely dinner," he said, standing directly behind her. "i like to cook myself, which doubles my

 21

"i'm happy to be here," murray said.
"in blacksmith?"
"in blacksmith, in the supermarket, in the rooming house, on the hill. i feel i'm learning important




things every day. death, disease, afterlife, outer space. it's all much clearer here. i can think and see."

we moved into the generic food area and murray paused with his plastic basket to probe among
the white cartons and jars. i wasn't sure i understood what he was talking about. what did he mean, much
clearer? he could think and see what?

steffie  took  my  hand  and  we  walked  past  the  fruit  bins,  an  area  that  extended  about  forty-five
yards along one wall. the bins were arranged diagonally and backed by mirrors that people accidentally
punched when reaching for fruit in the upper rows.  a voice on the loudspeaker said: "kleenex  softique,
your  truck's  blocking  the  entrance."  apples  and  lemons  tumbled  in  twos  and  threes  to  the  floor  when
someone took a fruit from certain places in the stacked array. there were six kinds of apples, there were
exotic melons in several pastels. everything seemed to be in season, sprayed, burnished, bright. people
tore filmy bags off racks and tried to figure out which end opened. i realized the place was awash in noise.
the  toneless  systems,  the  jangle  and  skid  of  carts,  the  loudspeaker  and  coffee-making  machines,  the
cries of children. and over it all, or under it all, a dull and unlocatable roar, as of some form of swarming
life just outside the range of human apprehension.
"did you tell denise you were sorry?"

"maybe later," steffie said. "remind me."

"she's a sweet girl and she wants to be your older sister and your friend if you'll let her."

"i don't know about friend. she's a little bossy, don't you think?"

"aside from telling her you're sorry, be sure to give her back her physicians' desk reference."

"she reads that thing all the time. don't you think that's weird?"

"at least she reads something."

"sure, lists of drugs and medicines. and do you want to know why?"

"why?"

"because she's trying to find out the side effects of the stuff that baba uses."

"what does baba use?"

"don't ask me. ask denise."

"how do you know she uses anything?"

"ask denise."

"why don't i ask baba?"

"ask baba," she said.


murray came out of an aisle and walked alongside babette, just ahead of us. he took a twin roll of
paper towels out of her cart and smelled it. denise had found some friends and they went up front to look
at  the  paperback  books  in  spindly  racks,  the  books  with  shiny  metallic  print,  raised  letters,  vivid
illustrations of cult violence and windswept romance. denise was wearing a green visor. i heard babette
tell murray she'd been wearing it fourteen hours a day for three weeks now. she would not go out without
it, would not even leave her room. she wore it in school, when there was school, wore it to the toilet, the
dentist's  chair,  the  dinner  table.  something  about  the  visor  seemed  to  speak  to  her,  to  offer  wholeness
and identity.
"it's her interface with the world," murray said.


he  helped  babette  push  her  loaded  cart.  i  heard  him  say  to  her,  "tibetans  believe  there  is  a
transitional state between death and rebirth. death is a waiting period, basically. soon a fresh womb will
receive the soul. in the meantime the soul restores to itself some of the divinity lost at birth." he studied
her profile as if to detect a reaction. "that's what i think of whenever i come in here. this place recharges
us spiritually, it prepares us, it's a gateway or pathway. look how bright. it's full of psychic data."
my wife smiled at him.


"everything is concealed in symbolism, hidden by veils of mystery and layers of cultural material.
but it is psychic data, absolutely. the large doors slide open, they close unbidden. energy waves, incident
radiation. all the letters and numbers are here, all the colors of the spectrum, all the voices and sounds, all
the code words and ceremonial phrases. it is just a question of deciphering, rearranging, peeling off the
layers of unspeakability. not that we would want to, not that any useful purpose would be served. this is
not tibet. even tibet is not tibet anymore."
he studied her profile. she put some yogurt in her cart.


"tibetans try to see death for what it is. it is the end of attachment to things. this simple truth is
hard  to  fathom.  but  once  we  stop  denying  death,  we  can  proceed  calmly  to  die  and  then  go  on  to
experience  uterine  rebirth  or  judeo-  christian  afterlife  or  out-of-body  experience  or  a  trip  on  a  ufo  or



22

he was almost whispering now and i tried to get up closer without ramming my cart into babette's.

whatever we wish to call it. we can do so with clear vision, without awe or terror. we don't have to cling to
life artificially, or to death for that matter. we simply walk toward the sliding doors. waves and radiation.
look how well-lighted everything is. the place is sealed off, self-contained. it is timeless. another reason
why i think of tibet. dying is an art in tibet. a priest walks in, sits down, tells the weeping relatives to get
out  and  has  the  room  sealed.  doors,  windows  sealed.  he  has  serious  business  to  see  to.  chants,
numerology, horoscopes, recitations. here we don't die, we shop. but the difference is less marked than
you think."

i wanted to hear everything.

"supermarkets  this large and clean and  modern are  a revelation  to  me.  i spent  my life in small
steamy  delicatessens  with  slanted  display  cabinets  full  of  trays  that  hold  soft  wet  lumpy  matter  in  pale
colors. high enough cabinets so you had to stand on tiptoes to give your order. shouts, accents. in cities
no one notices specific dying. dying is a quality of the air. it's everywhere and nowhere. men shout as
they die, to be noticed, remembered for a second or two. to die in an apartment instead of a house can
depress  the  soul,  i  would  imagine,  for  several  lives  to  come.  in  a  town  there  are  houses,  plants  in  bay
windows. people notice dying better. the dead have faces, automobiles. if you don't know a name, you
know a street name, a dog's name. 'he drove  an orange mazda.'  you know a couple of useless things
about a person  that become  major  facts of identification and cosmic placement when he dies suddenly,
after  a  short  illness,  in  his  own  bed,  with  a  comforter  and  matching  pillows,  on  a  rainy  wednesday
afternoon, feverish, a little congested in the sinuses and chest, thinking about his dry cleaning."

babette said, "where is wilder?" and turned to stare at me in a way that suggested ten minutes
had  passed  since  she'd  last  seen  him.  other  looks,  less  pensive  and  less  guilty,  indicated  greater  time
spans, deeper seas of inattention. like: "i didn't know whales were mammals." the greater the time span,
the blanker the look, the more dangerous the situation. it was as if guilt were a luxury she allowed herself
only when the danger was minimal.
"how could he get out of the cart without my noticing?"


the three adults each stood at the head of an aisle and peered into the traffic of carts and gliding
bodies. then we did three more aisles, heads set forward, weaving slightly as we changed our sightlines. i
kept  seeing  colored  spots  off  to  the  right  but  when  i  turned  there  was  nothing  there.  i'd  been  seeing
colored spots for years but never so many, so gaily animated. murray saw wilder in another woman's cart.
the woman waved at babette and headed toward us. she lived on our street with a teenage daughter and
an  asian  baby,  chun  duc.  everyone  referred  to  the  baby  by  name,  almost  in  a  tone  of  proud
proprietorship, but no one knew who chun belonged to or where he or she had come from.
"kleenex softique, kleenex softique."


steffie was holding my hand in a way i'd come to realize, over a period of time, was not meant to
be gently possessive, as i'd thought at first, but reassuring. i was a little astonished. a firm grip that would
help me restore confidence in myself, keep me from becoming resigned to whatever melancholy moods
she thought she detected hovering about my person.
before murray went to the express line he invited us to dinner, a week from saturday.

"you don't have to let me know till the last minute."

"we'll be there," babette said.


"i'm not preparing anything major, so just call beforehand and tell me if something else came up.
you don't even have to call. if you don't show up, i'll know that something came up and you couldn't let me
know."
"murray, we'll be there."

"bring the kids."

"no."


"great.  but  if  you  decide  to  bring  them,  no  problem.  i  don't  want  you  to  feel  i'm  holding  you  to
something.  don't  feel  you've  made  an  ironclad  commitment.  you'll  show  up  or  you  won't.  i  have  to  eat
anyway, so there's no major catastrophe if something comes up and you have to cancel. i just want you to
know i'll be there if you decide to drop by, with or without kids. we have till next may or june to do this
thing so there's no special mystique about a week from saturday."
"are you coming back next semester?" i said.

'they want me to teach a course in the cinema of car crashes."

"do it."

"i will."


i rubbed against babette in the checkout line. she backed into me and i reached around her and
put my hands on her breasts.  she rotated her hips and i nuzzled her hair and  murmured, "dirty blond."

 23

people  wrote  checks,  tall  boys  bagged  the  merchandise.  not  everyone  spoke  english  at  the  cash
terminals, or near the fruit bins and frozen foods, or out among the cars in the lot. more and more i heard
languages i could not identify much less understand, although the tall boys were american-born and the
checkout women as well, short, fattish in blue tunics, wearing stretch slacks and tiny white espadrilles. i
tried to  fit  my hands into babette's skirt, over her belly, as the slowly moving line edged toward  the last
purchase point, the breath mints and nasal inhalers.

it was out in  the parking  lot that we heard the first of the rumors about a  man  dying during  the
inspection  of  the  grade  school,  one  of  the  masked  and  mylex-suited  men,  heavy-booted  and  bulky.
collapsed and died, went the story that was going around, in a classroom on the second floor.


10

tuition at the college-on-the-hill is fourteen thousand dollars, sunday brunch included. i sense there is a
connection between this powerful number and the way the students arrange themselves physically in the
reading  areas  of  the  library.  they  sit  on  broad  cushioned  seats  in  various  kinds  of  ungainly  posture,
clearly calculated to be the identifying signs of some kinship group or secret organization. they are fetal,
splayed,  knock-kneed,  arched,  square-knotted,  sometimes  almost  upside-down.  the  positions  are  so
studied  they  amount  to  a  classical  mime.  there  is  an  element  of  overrefinement  and  inbreeding.
sometimes i feel i've wandered into a far eastern dream, too remote to be interpreted. but it is only the
language of economic class they are speaking, in one of its allowable outward forms, like the convocation
of station wagons at the start of the year.

denise watched her mother pull the little cellophane ribbon on a bonus pack of sixteen individually
wrapped  units  of  chewing  gum.  her  eyes  narrowed  as  she  turned  back  to  the  address  books  on  the
kitchen table before her. the eleven-year-old face was an expert mask of restrained exasperation.

case you didn't know."


believing you didn't see."

she was transcribing names and phone numbers from an old book to a new one. there were no
addresses. her friends had phone numbers only, a race of people with a seven-bit analog consciousness.

"i'm happy to do it either way," babette said. "it's totally up to you. either i chew gum with sugar
and artificial coloring or i chew sugarless and colorless gum that's harmful to rats."
steffie got off the phone. "don't chew at all," she said. "did you ever think of that?"


babette was breaking eggs into a wooden salad bowl. she gave me a look that wondered how the
girl  could  talk  on  the  phone  and  listen  to  us  at  the  same  time.  i  wanted  to  say  because  she  finds  us
interesting.

again, take away my chewing gum and my mentho-lyptus."
"why do you have to do one or the other?" steffie said. "why not do neither one?"


"why not do both?" denise said, the face carefully emptying itself of expression. "that's what you
want, isn't it? we all get to do what we want, don't we? except if we want to go to school tomorrow we
can't because they're fumigating the place or whatever."


now and then."
"well it's not that simple," denise said.

"it's not a crime either. i chew about two of those little chunks a day."

"well you can't anymore."


"well i can, denise. i want to. chewing happens to relax me. you're making a fuss over nothing."
steffie  managed to get our attention by the sheer pleading force of the look on her face. her hand was
over the mouthpiece of the phone. she did not speak but only formed the words.





"you wanted me to chew sugarless gum, denise. it was your idea."
"there  was  no  warning  on  the  pack  then.  they  put  a  warning,  which  i  would  have  a  hard  time

the phone rang; steffie grabbed it.
"i'm not a criminal," babette said. "all i want to do is chew a pathetic little tasteless chunk of gum

the stovers want to come over.
"parents or children?" babette said.
my daughter shrugged.
"we don't want them," babette said.



24

she waited a long moment, then said evenly, "that stuff causes cancer in laboratory animals in

babette said  to  the  girls, "look,  either i chew gum or i smoke.  if you want  me  to start smoking

"keep them out," denise said.
"what do i say?
"say anything you want."
"just keep them out of here."
"they're boring."
"tell them to stay home."
steffie  retreated  with  the  phone,  appearing  to  shield  it  with  her  body,  her  eyes  full  of  fear  and








excitement.
"a little gum can't possibly hurt," babette said.

"i guess you're right. never mind. just a warning on the pack."

steffie hung up. "just hazardous to your health," she said.

"just rats," denise said. "i guess you're right. never mind."

"maybe she thinks they died in their sleep."

"just useless rodents, so what's the difference?"

"what's the difference, what's the fuss?" steffie said.

"plus i'd like to believe she chews only two pieces a day, the way she forgets things."

"what do i forget?" babette said.

"it's all right," denise said. "never mind."

"what do i forget?"

"go ahead and chew. never mind the warning. i don't care."


i scooped wilder off a chair and gave him a noisy kiss on the ear and he shrank away in delight.
then  i  put  him  on  the  counter  and  went  upstairs  to  find  heinrich.  he  was  in  his  room  studying  the
deployment of plastic chessmen.
"still playing with the fellow in prison? how's it going?"

"pretty good. i think i got him cornered."

"what do you know about this fellow? i've been meaning to ask."

"like who did he kill? that's the big thing today. concern for the victim."

"you've been playing chess with the  man  for months. what do you know about him except that

he's in jail for life, for murder? is he young, old, black, white? do you communicate at all except for chess
moves?"












shabby little room off a six-story concrete car park?"
"some handguns and a bolt-action rifle with a scope."


"a telescopic sight. did he fire from a highway overpass, a rented room? did he walk into a bar, a
washette, his former place of employment and start firing indiscriminately? people scattering, taking cover
under tables. people out on the street thinking they heard firecrackers. 'i was just waiting for the bus when
i heard this little popping noise like firecrackers going off.'"


voice, go to the movies, read books about other mass murderers to refresh his memory?"




fired from his job? had he been hearing voices?"



"we send notes sometimes."
"who did he kill?"
"he was under pressure."
"and what happened?"
"it kept building and building."
"so he went out and shot someone. who did he shoot?"
"some people in iron city."
"how many?"
"five."
"five people."
"not counting the state trooper, which was later."
"six  people.  did  he  care  for  his  weapons  obsessively?  did  he  have  an  arsenal  stashed  in  his

"he went up to a roof."
"a rooftop sniper. did he write in his diary before he went up to the roof? did he make tapes of his

"made tapes."
"made tapes. what did he do with them?"
"sent them to people he loved, asking for forgiveness."
"'i can't help myself, folks.' were the victims total strangers? was it a grudge killing? did he get

"total strangers."
"had he been hearing voices?"

 25

"insistent pressuring voices. how did he deal with the media? give lots of interviews, write letters

"there is no media in iron city. he didn't think of that till it was too late. he says if he had to do it

"on tv."
"talking just to him? singling him out?"
"telling him to go down in history. he was twenty-seven, out of work, divorced, with his car up on




blocks. time was running out on him."

to the editor of the local paper, try to make a book deal?"

all over again, he wouldn't do it as an ordinary murder, he would do it as an assassination."
"he would select more carefully, kill one famous person, get noticed, make it stick."

"he now knows he won't go down in history."


"neither will i."
"but you've got hitler."

"yes, i have, haven't i?"

"what's tommy roy foster got?"


"all  right,  he's  told  you  all  these  things  in  the  letters  he  sends.  what  do  you  say  when  you
respond?"

"i'm losing my hair."

i looked at him. he wore a warmup suit, a towel around his neck, sweatbands on both wrists.

"you know what your mother would say about this chess by mail relationship."

"i know what you would say. you're saying it."

"how is your mother? hear from her lately?"

"she wants me to go out to the ashram this summer."

"do you want to go?"

"who  knows  what  i  want  to  do?  who  knows  what  anyone  wants  to  do?  how  can  you  be  sure
about something like that? isn't it all a question of brain chemistry, signals going back and forth, electrical
energy in the cortex? how do you know whether something is really what you want to do or just some kind
of nerve impulse in the brain? some minor little activity takes place somewhere in this unimportant place
in one of the brain hemispheres and suddenly i want to go to montana or i don't want to go to montana.
how do i know i really want  to go and it isn't just some neurons  firing or something?  maybe it's just an
accidental flash in the medulla and suddenly there i am in montana and i find out i really didn't want to go
there in the first place. i can't control what happens in my brain, so how can i be sure what i want to do ten
seconds from now, much less montana next summer? it's all this activity in the brain and you don't know
what's you as a person and what's some neuron that just happens to fire or just happens to misfire. isn't
that why tommy roy killed those people?"


in the morning i walked to the bank. i went to the automated teller machine to check my balance. i
inserted  my  card,  entered  my  secret  code,  tapped  out  my  request.  the  figure  on  the  screen  roughly
corresponded  to  my  independent  estimate,  feebly  arrived  at  after  long  searches  through  documents,
tormented arithmetic. waves of relief and gratitude flowed over me. the system had blessed my life. i felt
its support and approval. the system hardware, the  mainframe sitting in a  locked room in some distant
city. what a pleasing interaction. i sensed that something of deep personal value, but not money, not that
at  all,  had  been  authenticated  and  confirmed.  a  deranged  person  was  escorted  from  the  bank  by  two
armed guards. the system was invisible, which made it all the more impressive, all the more disquieting to
deal with. but we were in accord, at least for now. the networks, the circuits, the streams, the harmonies.


11

i woke in the grip of a death sweat. defenseless against my own racking fears. a pause at the center of
my  being.  i  lacked  the  will  and  physical  strength  to  get  out  of  bed  and  move  through  the  dark  house,
clutching walls and stair rails. to feel my way, reinhabit my body, re-enter the world. sweat trickled down
my  ribs.  the  digital  reading  on  the  clock-radio  was  3:  51.  always  odd  numbers  at  times  like  this.  what
does  it  mean?  is  death  odd-numbered?  are  there  life-enhancing  numbers,  other  numbers  charged  with
menace? babette murmured in her sleep and i moved close, breathing her heat.

finally  i  slept,  to  be  awakened  by  the  smell  of  burning  toast.  that  would  be  steffie.  she  burns
toast  often,  at  any  hour,  intentionally.  she  loves  the  smell,  she  is  addicted;  it's  her  treasured  scent.  it
satisfies  her  in  ways  wood  smoke  cannot,  or  snuffed  candles,  or  the  odor  of  explosive  powder  drifting



26

"want some toast?" steffie said.
"i'll be fifty-one next week."
"that's not old, is it?"
"i've felt the same for twenty-five years."
"bad. how old is my mother?"
"she's still young. she was only twenty when we were married the first time."
"is she younger than baba?"
"about  the  same.  just  so  you  don't  think  i'm  one  of  those  men  who  keeps  finding  younger

down the street from firecrackers set off on the fourth. she has evolved orders of preference. burnt rye,
burnt white, so on.

i put on my robe and went downstairs. i was always putting on a bathrobe and going somewhere
to talk seriously to a child. babette was with her in the kitchen. it startled me. i thought she was still in bed.








women."

where the levels of data are numerous and deep, as murray might say.

"is she still in the cia?" steffie said.

"we're not supposed to talk about that. she's just a contract agent anyway."

"what's that?"

"that's what people do today for a second income."

"what exactly does she do?" babette said.

"she gets a phone call from brazil. that activates her."

"then what?"

"she carries money in a suitcase the length and breadth of latin america."

"that's all? i could do that."

"sometimes they send her books to review."

"have i met her?" babette said.

"no."

"do i know her name?"

"dana breedlove."

steffie's lips formed the words as i spoke them.

"you're not planning to eat that, are you?" i said to her.

"i always eat my toast."

the phone rang and i picked it up. a woman's voice delivered a high-performance hello. it said it
was  computer-generated,  part  of  a  marketing  survey  aimed  at  determining  current  levels  of  consumer
desire. it said it would ask a series of questions, pausing after each to give me a chance to reply.

voice, i spoke to babette in low tones.








read the label.
"virgin acrylic," she said into the phone.

babette checked the label on her sweater. a soft rain began to fall.

"how does it feel being nearly fifty-one?" she said.

"no different from fifty."

"except one is even, one is odd," she pointed out.


that night, in murray's off-white room, after a spectacular meal of cornish hen in the shape of a
frog,  prepared  on  a  two-burner  hot  plate,  we  moved  from  our  metal  folding  chairs  to  the  bunk  bed  for
coffee.

stadium smoke, never got to feel at home in my own apartment. now i have a place."



"you've done wonders," babette said, her gaze sweeping desperately across the room.
"it's small, it's dark, it's plain," he said in a self-satisfied way. "a container for thought."

i  gave  the  phone  to  steffie.  when  it  became  clear  that  she  was  occupied  with  the  synthesized

"she liked to plot."
"who?"
"dana. she liked to get me involved in things."
"what kind of things?"
"factions. playing certain friends against other friends. household plots, faculty plots."
"sounds like ordinary stuff."
"she spoke english to me, spanish or portuguese to the telephone."
steffie twisted around, used her free hand to pull her sweater away from her body, enabling her to

i wasn't sure whether my replies were meant for steffie or babette. this happens in the kitchen,

"when  i  was  a  sportswriter,"  murray  said,  "i  traveled  constantly,  lived  in  planes  and  hotels  and

 27

i gestured toward the old four-story building on several acres across the street. "do you get any

because we were seated on the bed, murray had to lean well forward, looking past the coffee cup

"how many children do you have, all told?"
she appeared to pause.
"there's wilder, of course. there's denise."
murray sipped his coffee, trying to look at her, sideways, with the cup at his lower lip.
'there's eugene, who's living with his daddy this year in western australia. eugene is eight. his


noise from the insane asylum?"

"you mean beatings and shrieks? it's interesting that people still call it the insane asylum. it must
be the striking architecture,  the high steep roof, the tall chimneys, the columns,  the little  flourishes here
and there  that are either quaint or sinister--i can't make up my mind.  it doesn't look like a rest home or
psychiatric facility. it looks like an insane asylum."
his trousers were going shiny at the knees.


"i'm sorry you didn't bring the kids. i want to get to know small kids. this is the society of kids. i tell
my  students  they're  already  too  old  to  figure  importantly  in  the  making  of  society.  minute  by  minute
they're beginning to diverge from each other. 'even as we sit here,' i tell them, 'you are spinning out from
the core, becoming less recognizable as a group, less targetable by advertisers and mass-producers of
culture. kids are a true universal. but you're well beyond that, already beginning to drift, to feel estranged
from  the  products  you  consume.  who  are  they  designed  for?  what  is  your  place  in  the  marketing
scheme? once you're out of school, it is only a matter of time before you experience the vast loneliness
and dissatisfaction of consumers who have lost their group identity.' then i tap my pencil on the table to
indicate time passing ominously."

poised in my hand, in order to address babette.





daddy does research in the outback. his daddy is also wilder's daddy."

"the boy is growing up without television," i said, "which may make him worth talking to, murray,
as a sort of wild child, a savage plucked from the bush, intelligent and literate but deprived of the deeper
codes and messages that mark his species as unique."
"tv is a problem only if you've forgotten how to look and listen," murray said. "my students and i

discuss this all the time. they're beginning  to feel they ought to  turn against the medium, exactly as an
earlier generation turned against their parents and their country. i tell them they have to learn to look as
children again. root out content. find the codes and messages, to use your phrase, jack."

"what do they say to that?"

"television is just another name  for  junk  mail.  but  i  tell  them  i can't accept that.  i  tell them i've
been sitting in this room for more than two months, watching tv into the early hours, listening carefully,
taking notes. a great and humbling experience, let me tell you. close to mystical."
"what's your conclusion?"

he crossed his legs primly and sat with the cup in his lap, smiling straight ahead.


"waves and radiation," he said. "i've come to understand that the medium is a primal force in the
american home. sealed-off, timeless, self-contained, self-referring. it's like a myth being born right there in
our living room, like something we know in a dreamlike and preconscious way. i'm very enthused, jack."
he looked at me, still smiling in a half sneaky way.


"you  have  to  learn  how  to  look.  you  have  to  open  yourself  to  the  data.  tv  offers  incredible
amounts  of  psychic  data.  it  opens  ancient  memories  of  world  birth,  it  welcomes  us  into  the  grid,  the
network  of  little  buzzing  dots  that  make  up  the  picture  pattern.  there  is  light,  there  is  sound.  i  ask  my
students,  'what  more  do  you  want?'  look  at  the  wealth  of  data  concealed  in  the  grid,  in  the  bright
packaging,  the  jingles,  the  slice-of-life  commercials,  the  products  hurtling  out  of  darkness,  the  coded
messages and endless repetitions, like chants, like mantras. 'coke is it, coke is it, coke is it.' the medium
practically overflows with sacred formulas if we can remember how to respond innocently and get past our
irritation, weariness and disgust."


they're ashamed of their television past. they want to talk about movies."







he got up and refilled our cups.
"how do you know so much?" babette said.
"i'm from new york."
"the more you talk, the sneakier you look, as if you're trying to put something over on us."
"the best talk is seductive."
"have you ever been married?" she said.

"but your students don't agree."
"worse than junk mail. television is the death throes of human consciousness, according to them.



28

"we all forget," i said.
"i forget names, faces, phone numbers, addresses, appointments, instructions, directions."
"it's something that's just been happening, more or less to everyone."
"i  forget  that  steffie  doesn't  like  to  be  called  stephanie.  sometimes  i  call  her  denise.  i  forget

"forgetfulness has gotten into the air and water. it's entered the food chain."
"maybe it's the gum i chew. is that too farfetched?"
"maybe it's something else."
"what do you mean?"
"you're taking something besides chewing gum."
"where did you get that idea?"
"i got it secondhand from steffie."
"who did steffie get it from?"
"denise."
she paused, conceding the possibility  that if denise is the source of a rumor or  theory, it could


"once, briefly. i was covering the jets, the mets and the nets. how odd a figure i must seem to
you now, a solitary crank who maroons himself with a tv set and dozens of stacks of dust-jacketed comic
books. don't think i wouldn't appreciate  a dramatic visit between  two and three in  the  morning," he  told
her, "from an intelligent woman in spike heels and a slit skirt, with high-impact accessories."

it was drizzling as we walked home, my arm around her waist. the streets were empty. along elm
all  the stores were dark, the two banks were dimly lit, the neon spectacles in  the window of  the optical
shop cast a gimmicky light on the sidewalk.
dacron, orion, lycra spandex.

"i know i forget things," she said, "but i didn't know it was so obvious."

"it isn't."

"did you hear denise? when was it, last week?"

"denise is smart and tough. no one else notices."


"i dial a number on the phone and forget who i'm calling. i go to the store and forget what to buy.
someone will tell me something, i'll forget it, they'll tell me again, i'll forget it, they'll tell me again, showing
a funny-looking smile."




where i've parked the car and then for a long, long moment i forget what the car looks like."










very well be true.
"what does denise say i'm taking?"

"i wanted to ask you before i asked her."


"to the best of  my knowledge, jack,  i'm not taking anything that could account  for  my  memory
lapses. on the other hand i'm not old, i haven't suffered an injury to the head and there's nothing in my
family background except tipped uteruses."
"you're saying maybe denise is right."

"we can't rule it out."

"you're saying maybe you're taking something that has the side effect of impairing memory."


"either  i'm  taking  something  and  i  don't  remember  or  i'm  not  taking  something  and  i  don't
remember. my life is either/or. either i chew regular gum or i chew sugarless gum. either i chew gum or i
smoke. either i smoke or i gain weight. either i gain weight or i run up the stadium steps."
"sounds like a boring life."

"i hope it lasts forever," she said.


soon the streets were covered with leaves. leaves came tumbling and scraping down the pitched
roofs. there were periods in every day when a stiff wind blew, baring the trees further, and retired men
appeared  in  the  backyards,  on  the  small  lawns  out  front,  carrying  rakes  with  curved  teeth.  black  bags
were arrayed at the curbstone in lopsided rows.



12

i  went  to  german  lessons  twice  a  week,  in  the  late  afternoon,  darkness  crowding  in  earlier  with  each
succeeding visit. it was howard dunlop's working rule that we sit facing each other during the full length of
the  lesson.  he  wanted  me  to  study  his  tongue  positions  as  he  demonstrated  the  pronunciation  of
consonants,  diphthongs,  long  and  short  vowels.  he  in  turn  would  look  closely  into  my  mouth  as  i

a series of frightened children appeared at our door for their halloween treats.

 29

"how many students do you have?"
"for german?"
"yes."
"you're  the  only  one  i  have  for  german.  i  used  to  have  others.  german  has  fallen  off.  these

"what else do you teach?"
"greek, latin, ocean sailing."
"people come here to learn ocean sailing?"
"not so much anymore."
"it's amazing  how  many people  teach  these  days,"  i said. "there is a teacher for  every person.

attempted to reproduce the unhappy sounds.
his was a mild and quiet face, an oval surface with no hint of distinctiveness until he started his

vocal routines. then the warping began. it was an eerie thing to see, shamefully fascinating, as a seizure
might be if witnessed in a controlled environment. he tucked his head into his trunk, narrowed his eyes,
made grimacing humanoid faces. when it was time  for me to repeat the noises i  did likewise,  if only to
please the teacher, twisting my mouth, shutting my eyes completely, conscious of an overarticulation so
tortured  it  must  have  sounded  like  a  sudden  bending  of  the  natural  law,  a  stone  or  tree  struggling  to
speak. when i opened my eyes he was only inches from my mouth, leaning in to peer. i used to wonder
what he saw in there.

there were strained silences before and after each lesson. i tried to make small talk, get him to
discuss his years as a chiropractor, his life before german. he would look off into the middle distance, not
angry or bored or evasive--just detached,  free of  the  connectedness of events, it seemed. when he did
speak, about the other boarders or the landlord, there was something querulous in his voice, a drawn-out
note  of  complaint.  it  was  important  for  him  to  believe  that  he'd  spent  his  life  among  people  who  kept
missing the point.




things go in cycles, like everything else."





everyone i know is either a teacher or a student. what do you think it means?"
he looked off toward a closet door.

"do you teach anything else?" i said.

"meteorology."

"meteorology. how did that come about?"


"my  mother's  death  had  a  terrible  impact  on  me.  i  collapsed  totally,  lost  my  faith  in  god.  i  was
inconsolable, withdrew completely into myself. then one day by chance i saw a weather report on tv. a
dynamic  young  man  with  a  glowing  pointer  stood  before  a  multicolored  satellite  photo,  predicting  the
weather for the next five days. i sat there mesmerized by his self-assurance and skill. it was as though a
message was being transmitted from the weather satellite through that young man and then to me in my
canvas  chair.  i  turned  to  meteorology  for  comfort.  i  read  weather  maps,  collected  books  on  weather,
attended launchings of weather balloons. i realized weather was something i'd been looking for all my life.
it brought me a sense of peace and security i'd never experienced. dew, frost and fog. snow flurries. the
jet stream. i believe there is a grandeur in the jet stream. i began to come out of my shell, talk to people in
the street. 'nice day.' 'looks like rain.' 'hot enough for you?' everyone notices the weather. first thing on
rising,  you  go  to  the  window,  look  at  the  weather.  you  do  it,  i  do  it.  i  made  a  list  of  goals  i  hoped  to
achieve in  meteorology.  i  took a correspondence course, got a degree  to  teach  the subject  in buildings
with a legal occupancy of less than one hundred. i've taught meteorology in church basements, in trailer
parks, in people's dens and living rooms. they came to hear me in millers creek, lumberville, watertown.
factory  workers,  housewives,  merchants,  members  of  the  police  and  the  fire.  i  saw  something  in  their
eyes. a hunger, a compelling need."

there were little holes in the cuffs of his thermal undershirt. we were standing in the middle of the
room. i waited for him to go on. it was the time of year, the time of day, for a small insistent sadness to
pass into the texture of things. dusk, silence, iron chill. something lonely in the bone.

when i got home, bob pardee was in the kitchen practicing his golf swing. bob is denise's father.
he said he was driving through town on his way to glassboro to make a presentation and thought he'd
take us all to dinner.

he  swung  his  locked  hands  in  slow  motion  over  his  left  shoulder,  following  through  smoothly.
denise eyed him from a stool by the window. he wore a half shaggy cardigan with sleeves that draped
over the cuffs.




"what kind of presentation?" she said.
"oh, you know. charts, arrows. slap some colors on a wall. it's a basic outreach tool, sweetheart."
"did you change jobs again?"



30

"funds for what?" denise said.
"there's  a  little  thing  you  might  have  had  occasion  to  hear  of,  called  the  nuclear  accident

"i'm raising funds. busy as hell, too, better believe."
"what kind of funds?"
"just whatever's out there, you know? people want to give me food stamps, etchings. hey, great,




i don't mind."

him. upstairs a british voice said: "there are forms of vertigo that do not include spinning."


readiness foundation. basically a legal defense fund for the industry. just in case kind of thing."

"just in case what?"

"just in case i  faint from hunger. let's sneak up on some ribs, why don't we?  you got your leg
men, you got your breast men. babette, what do you say? i'm about semiprepared to slaughter my own
animal."
"how many jobs is this anyway?"

"don't pester me, denise."

"never mind, i don't care, do what you want."


bob took the three older kids to the wagon wheel. i drove babette to the river-edge house where
she would read to mr. treadwell, the blind old man who lived there with his sister. wilder sat between us,
playing with the supermarket tabloids that treadwell favored as reading matter. as a volunteer reader to
the blind,  babette had some reservations about  the old gent's appetite for  the unspeakable and seamy,
believing that the handicapped were morally bound to higher types of entertainment. if we couldn't look to
them for victories of the human. spirit, who could we look to? they had an example to set just as she did
as  a  reader  and  morale-booster.  but  she  was  professional  in  her  duty,  reading  to  him  with  high
earnestness, as to a child, about dead men who leave messages on answering machines.

wilder and i waited in the car. the plan was that after the reading the three of us would meet the
wagon wheel group at the dinky donut, where they would have dessert and we would have dinner. i'd
brought along a copy of mein kampf for that segment of the evening.
the treadwell house was an old frame structure with rotting trellises along the porch. less than

five  minutes  after  she'd  entered,  babette  came  out,  walked  uncertainly  to  the  far  end  of  the  porch  and
peered across the dim yard. then she walked slowly toward the car.

life. there doesn't seem to be anything missing."


she isn't."

the two nearest houses were dark, both up for sale, and no one at four other houses in the area
knew anything about the  treadwells' movements over the past  few days.  we drove to  the state  trooper
barracks  and  talked  to  a  female  clerk  who  sat  behind  a  computer  console.  she  told  us  there  was  a
disappearance every eleven seconds and taped everything we said.

at  the dinky donut, outside town,  bob  pardee sat quietly as the family ate and  talked. the soft
pink  golfer's  face  had  begun  to  droop  from  his  skull.  his  flesh  seemed  generally  to  sag,  giving  him  the
hangdog look of someone under strict orders to lose weight. his hair was expensively cut and layered, a
certain amount of color combed in, a certain amount of technology brought to bear, but it seemed to need
a more dynamic head. i realized babette was looking at him carefully, trying to grasp the meaning of the
four careening years they'd spent as man and wife. the panoramic carnage. he drank, gambled, drove
his  car  down  embankments,  got  fired,  quit,  retired,  traveled  in  disguise  to  coaltown  where  he  paid  a
woman to speak swedish to him as they screwed. it was the swedish that enraged babette, either that or
his need  to confess it, and she hit out at him--hit out  with  the backs of her hands, with her elbows and
wrists. old loves, old fears. now she watched him with a tender sympathy, a reflectiveness that seemed
deep and fond and  generous  enough to contain all the magical counterspells to his current run of woe,
although i knew, of course, as i went back to my book, that it was only a passing affection, one of those
kindnesses no one understands.






"door was open. i went in, nobody. i looked around, nothing, nobody. i went upstairs, no sign of

"what do you know about his sister?"
"she's older than he is and probably in worse shape if you disregard the fact that he's blind and

he was bent over a putt. babette leaned on the refrigerator door with her arms folded, watching

by noon the next day they were dragging the river.

 31

13

the  students  tend  to  stick  close  to  campus.  there  is  nothing  for  them  to  do  in  blacksmith  proper,  no
natural  haunt  or  attraction.  they  have  their  own  food,  movies,  music,  theater,  sports,  conversation  and
sex. this is a town of dry cleaning shops and opticians. photos of looming victorian homes decorate the
windows of real estate firms. these pictures have not changed in years. the homes are sold or gone or
stand  in  other  towns  in  other  states.  this  is  a  town  of  tag  sales  and  yard  sales,  the  failed  possessions
arrayed in driveways and tended by kids.

babette called me at my office in centenary hall. she said heinrich had been down at the river,
wearing his camouflage cap and carrying an instamatic, to watch them drag for the bodies, and while he
was there word came that the treadwells had been found alive but shaken in an abandoned cookie shack
at  the  mid-village  mall,  a  vast  shopping  center  out  on  the  interstate.  apparently  they'd  been  wandering
through  the  mall  for  two  days,  lost,  confused  and  frightened,  before  taking  refuge  in  the  littered  kiosk.
they  spent  two  more  days  in  the  kiosk,  the  weak  and  faltering  sister  venturing  out  to  scavenge  food
scraps from the cartoon-character disposal baskets with swinging doors. it was sheer luck that their stay
at the mall coincided with a spell of mild weather. no one knew at this point why they didn't ask for help. it
was probably just the vastness and strangeness of the place and their own advanced age that made them
feel  helpless  and  adrift  in  a  landscape  of  remote  and  menacing  figures.  the  treadwells  didn't  get  out
much.  in  fact  no  one  yet  knew  how  they'd  managed  to  get  to  the  mall.  possibly  their  grandniece  had
dropped  them  off  in  her  car  and  then  forgotten  to  pick  them  up.  the  grandniece  could  not  be  reached,
babette said, for comment.

the day before the happy discovery, the police had called in a psychic to help them determine the
treadwells' whereabouts and fate. it was all over the local paper. the psychic was a woman who lived in
a mobile home in a wooded area outside town. she wished to be known only as adele t. according to the
paper, she and the police chief, hollis wright, sat in the mobile home while she looked at photos of the
treadwells and smelled articles from their wardrobe. then she asked the chief to leave her alone for an
hour.  she  did  exercises,  ate  some  rice  and  dahl,  proceeded  to  trance  in.  during  this  altered  state,  the
report  went  on,  she  attempted  to  put  a  data  trace  on  whatever  distant  physical  systems  she  wished  to
locate, in this case old man treadwell and his sister. when chief wright re-entered the trailer,  adele t.
told him to forget the river and to concentrate on dry land with a moonscape look about it, within a fifteen-
mile radius of the treadwell home. the police went at once to a gypsum processing operation ten miles
down river, where they found an airline bag that contained a handgun and two kilos of uncut heroin.

the  police  had  consulted  adele  t.  on  a  number  of  occasions  and  she  had  led  them  to  two
bludgeoned bodies, a syrian in a refrigerator and a cache of marked bills totaling six hundred thousand
dollars, although in each instance, the report concluded, the police had been looking for something else.



14

we  crowded  before  the  window  in  steffie's  small  room,  watching  the  spectacular  sunset.  only  heinrich
stayed away, either because he distrusted wholesome communal pleasures or because he believed there
was something ominous in the modern sunset.

later i sat up in bed in my bathrobe studying german. i muttered words to myself and wondered
whether i'd be able to restrict my german-speaking at the spring conference to brief opening remarks or
whether the other participants would expect the language to be used throughout, in lectures, at meals, in
small talk, as a mark of our seriousness, our uniqueness in world scholarship.
the tv said: "and other trends that could dramatically impact your portfolio."


denise  came  in  and  sprawled  across  the  foot  of  the  bed,  her  head  resting  on  her  folded  arms,
facing  away  from  me.  how  many  codes,  countercodes,  social  histories  were  contained  in  this  simple
posture? a full minute passed.







"what are we going to do about baba?" she said.
"what do you mean?"
"she can't remember anything."
"did she ask you whether she's taking medication?"
"no."
"no she's not or no she didn't ask?"

the american mystery deepens.



32

"she didn't ask."
"she was supposed to," i said.
"well she didn't."
"how do you know she's taking something?"
"i saw the bottle buried in the trash under the kitchen sink. a prescription bottle. it had her name

"what is the name of the medication?"
"dylar. one every three days. which sounds like it's dangerous or habit-forming or whatever."
"what does your drug reference say about dylar?"
"it's not in there. i spent hours. there are four indexes."
"it must be recently marketed. do you want me to double-check the book?"
"i already looked. i looked"
"we  could  always  call  her  doctor.  but  i  don't  want  to  make  too  much  of  this.  everybody  takes






and the name of the medication."







some kind of medication, everybody forgets things occasionally."

"not like my mother."

"i forget things all the time."

"what do you take?"

"blood pressure pills, stress pills, allergy pills, eye drops, aspirin. run of the mill."

"i looked in the medicine chest in your bathroom."

"no dylar?"

"i thought there might be a new bottle."

"the doctor prescribed thirty pills. that was it. run of the mill. everybody takes something."

"i still want to know," she said.

all this time she'd been turned away from me. there were plot potentials in this situation, chances
for people to make devious maneuvers, secret plans. but now she shifted position, used an elbow to prop
her upper body and watched me speculatively from the foot of the bed.












good fortune. i wanted to do something german. i felt a gesture was called for."
"heinrich gerhardt gladney?"

"i thought it had an authority that might cling to him. i thought it was forceful and impressive and i

still  do.  i  wanted  to  shield  him,  make  him  unafraid.  people  were  naming  their  children  kim,  kelly  and
tracy."

of her face, gave to her moments of concentration a puggish and half-belligerent look.



what it is exactly. it's just there. in the middle of it all is hitler, of course."
"he was on again last night."

"he's always on. we couldn't have television without him."

"they lost the war," she said. "how great could they be?"


"a valid point. but it's not a question of greatness. it's not a question of good and evil. i don't know
what it is. look at it this way. some people always wear a favorite color. some people carry a gun. some
people put on a uniform and feel bigger, stronger, safer. it's in this area that my obsessions dwell."

steffie came in wearing denise's green visor. i didn't know what this meant. she climbed up on
the  bed  and  all  three  of  us  went  through  my  german-english  dictionary,  looking  for  words  that  sound
about the same in both languages, like orgy and shoe.

"can i ask you something?"
"sure," i said.
"you won't get mad?"
"you know what's in my medicine chest. what secrets are left?"
"why did you name heinrich heinrich?"
"fair question."
"you don't have to answer."
"good question. no reason why you shouldn't ask."
"so why did you?"
"i thought it was a forceful name, a strong name. it has a kind of authority."
"is he named after anyone?"
"no. he was born shortly after i started the department and i guess i wanted to acknowledge my

"do you think i miscalculated?"
"it's not for me to say."
"there's  something  about  german  names,  the  german  language,  german  things.  i  don't  know

there was a long silence. she kept watching me. her features, crowded somewhat in the center

 33

heinrich came running down the hall, burst into the room.
"come on, hurry up, plane crash footage." then he was out the door, the girls were off the bed, all



three of them running along the hall to the tv set.

i sat in bed a little stunned. the swiftness and noise of their leaving had put the room in a state of
molecular agitation. in the debris of invisible matter, the question seemed to be, what is happening here?
by the time i got to the room at the end of the hall, there was only a puff of black smoke at the edge of the
screen. but the crash was shown two more times, once in stop action replay, as an analyst attempted to
explain the reason for the plunge. a jet trainer in an air show in new zealand.
we had two closet doors that opened by themselves.


that night, a friday, we gathered in front of the set, as was the custom and the rule, with take-out
chinese.  there  were  floods,  earthquakes,  mud  slides,  erupting  volcanoes.  we'd  never  before  been  so
attentive to our duty, our friday assembly. heinrich was not sullen, i was not bored. steffie, brought close
to tears by a sitcom husband arguing with his wife, appeared totally absorbed in these documentary clips
of calamity and death. babette tried to switch to a comedy series about a group of racially mixed kids who
build  their  own  communications  satellite.  she  was  startled  by  the  force  of  our  objection.  we  were
otherwise  silent,  watching  houses  slide  into  the  ocean,  whole  villages  crackle  and  ignite  in  a  mass  of
advancing lava. every disaster made us wish for more, for something bigger, grander, more sweeping.

i  walked  into  my  office  on  monday  to  find  murray  sitting  in  the  chair  adjacent  to  the  desk,  like

someone  waiting  for  a  nurse  to  arrive  with  a  blood-pressure  gauge.  he'd  been  having  trouble,  he  said,
establishing  an  elvis  presley  power  base  in  the  department  of  american  environments.  the  chairman,
alfonse stompanato, seemed to feel that one of the other instructors, a three-hundred-pound former rock
'n' roll bodyguard named dimitrios cotsakis, had established prior right by having flown to memphis when
the king died, interviewed members of the king's entourage and family, been interviewed himself on local
television as an interpreter of the phenomenon.

a more than middling coup, murray conceded. i suggested that i might drop by his next lecture,
informally, unannounced, simply to lend a note of consequence to the proceedings, to give him the benefit
of whatever influence and prestige might reside in my office, my subject, my physical person. he nodded
slowly, fingering the ends of his beard.

later  at  lunch  i  spotted  only  one  empty  chair,  at  a  table  occupied  by  the  new  york  émigrés.
alfonse sat at the head of the table, a commanding presence even in a campus lunchroom. he was large,
sardonic,  dark-staring,  with  scarred  brows  and  a  furious  beard  fringed  in  gray.  it  was  the  very  beard  i
would have grown in 1969 if janet  savory,  my second wife, heinrich's mother, hadn't argued against it.
"let them see that bland expanse," she said, in her tiny dry voice. "it is more effective than you think."

alfonse  invested  everything  he  did  with  a  sense  of  all-consuming  purpose.  he  knew  four
languages, had a photographic memory, did complex mathematics in his head. he'd once told me that the
art of getting ahead in new york was based on learning how to express dissatisfaction in an interesting
way. the air was full of rage and complaint. people had no tolerance for your particular hardship unless
you knew how to entertain them with it. alfonse himself was occasionally entertaining in a pulverizing way.
he had a manner that enabled him to absorb and destroy all opinions in conflict with his. when he talked
about popular culture, he exercised the closed logic of a religious zealot, one who kills for his beliefs. his
breathing  grew  heavy,  arrhythmic,  his  brows  seemed  to  lock.  the  other  émigrés  appeared  to  find  his
challenges  and  taunts  a  proper  context  for  their  endeavor.  they  used  his  office  to  pitch  pennies  to  the
wall.

themselves intrigued by catastrophe when they see it on television?"

so entertaining.




incessant bombardment of information."
"it's obvious," lasher said. a slight man with a taut face and slicked-back hair.


"the flow is constant," alfonse said. "words, pictures, numbers, facts, graphics, statistics, specks,
waves, particles, motes. only a catastrophe gets our attention. we want them, we need them, we depend
on them. as long as they happen somewhere else. this is where california comes in. mud slides, brush
fires,  coastal  erosion,  earthquakes,  mass  killings,  et  cetera.  we  can  relax  and  enjoy  these  disasters

we wanted more, more.
"it's natural, it's normal," he said, with a reassuring nod. "it happens to everybody."
"why?"
"because  we're  suffering  from  brain  fade.  we  need  an  occasional  catastrophe  to  break  up  the

i  said  to  him,  "why  is  it,  alfonse,  that  decent,  well-meaning  and  responsible  people  find

i told him about the recent evening of lava, mud and raging water that the children and i had found



34

"you're saying it's more or less universal, to be fascinated by tv disasters."
"for  most  people  there  are  only  two  places  in  the  world.  where  they  live  and  their  tv  set.  if  a

grappa  casually  tossed  half  a  buttered  roll  at  lasher,  hitting  him  on  the  shoulder.  grappa  was

grappa looked at murray.
"i brushed my teeth with my finger after the ali-foreman fight in zaire," murray said. "that's the

because in our hearts we feel that california deserves whatever it gets. californians invented the concept
of life-style. this alone warrants their doom."
cotsakis crushed a can of diet pepsi and threw it at a garbage pail.


"japan is pretty good for disaster  footage," alfonse said. "india remains largely untapped.  they
have  tremendous  potential  with  their  famines,  monsoons,  religious  strife,  train  wrecks,  boat  sinkings,  et
cetera.  but  their  disasters  tend  to  go  unrecorded.  three  lines  in  the  newspaper.  no  film  footage,  no
satellite hookup. this is why california is so important. we not only enjoy seeing them punished for their
relaxed life-style and progressive social ideas but we know we're not missing anything. the cameras are
right there. they're standing by. nothing terrible escapes their scrutiny."


thing happens on television, we have every right to find it fascinating, whatever it is."
"i don't know whether to feel good or bad about learning that my experience is widely shared."

"feel bad," he said.

"it's obvious," lasher said. "we all feel bad. but we can enjoy it on that level."


murray  said,  "this  is  what  comes  from  the  wrong  kind  of  attentiveness.  people  get  brain  fade.
this is because they've forgotten how to listen and look as children. they've forgotten how to collect data.
in  the  psychic  sense  a  forest  fire  on  tv  is  on  a  lower  plane  than  a  ten-second  spot  for  automatic
dishwasher  all.  the  commercial  has  deeper  waves,  deeper  emanations.  but  we  have  reversed  the
relative significance of these things. this is why  people's eyes,  ears, brains and nervous systems  have
grown weary. it's a simple case of misuse."

pale and baby-fattish and the tossed roll was an attempt to get lasher's attention.
grappa said to him, "did you ever brush your teeth with your finger?"


"i brushed  my  teeth with  my  finger  the  first time i stayed overnight at  my wife's parents' house,
before we were married, when her parents spent a weekend at asbury park. they were an ipana family."

"forgetting my toothbrush is a fetish with me," cotsakis said. "i brushed my teeth with my finger at
woodstock, altamont, monterey, about a dozen other seminal events."


southernmost point i've ever brushed my teeth with my finger at."
lasher looked at grappa.

"did you ever crap in a toilet bowl that had no seat?"


grappa's  response  was  semi-lyrical.  "a  great  and  funky  men's  room  in  an  old  socony  mobil
station on the boston post road the first time my father took the car outside the city. the station with the
flying red horse. you want the car? i can give you car details down to the last little option."

"these are the things they don't teach," lasher said. "bowls with no seats. pissing in sinks. the
culture of public toilets. all those great diners, movie houses, gas stations. the whole ethos of the road.
i've  pissed  in  sinks  all  through  the  american  west.  i've  slipped  across  the  border  to  piss  in  sinks  in
manitoba and alberta. this is what it's all about. the great western skies. the best western motels. the
diners and drive-ins. the poetry of the road, the plains, the desert. the filthy stinking toilets. i pissed in a
sink in utah when it was twenty-two below. that's the coldest i've ever pissed in a sink in."




a thing of the past."










death was not complete without some record of grappa's whereabouts.

"you spent a lot of time in your wife's parents' house, it seems, screwing," alfonse said.
"we were kids. it was too early in the cultural matrix for actual screwing."
"what were you doing?"
"she's my wife, alfonse. you want me to tell a crowded table?"
"james dean is dead and you're groping some twelve-year-old."
alfonse glared at dimitrios cotsakis.
"where were you when james dean died?"
"in the back of my uncle's restaurant in astoria, queens, vacuuming with the hoover."
alfonse looked at grappa.
"where  the  hell  were  you?"  he  said,  as  if  the  thought  had  just  occurred  to  him  that  the  actor's

alfonse stompanato looked hard at lasher.
"where were you when james dean died?" he said in a threatening voice.
"in my wife's parents' house before we were married, listening to 'make
believe ballroom' on the old emerson table model. the motorola with the glowing dial was already

 35

"ask me jeff chandler."
"you're a middle-aged man, nicky, who trafficks in his own childhood. you have an obligation to

"ask me john garfield, ask me monty clift."
cotsakis was a monolith of thick and wadded flesh. he'd been little richard's personal bodyguard

elliot lasher threw a chunk of raw carrot at him, then asked, "did you ever have a woman peel

"cocoa  beach,  florida,"  cotsakis  said.  "it  was  very  tremendous.  the  second  or  third  greatest

"i know exactly where i was, alfonse. let me think a minute."
"where were you, you son of a bitch?"
"i always know these things down to the smallest detail. but i was a dreamy adolescent. i have

"you were busy jerking off. is that what you mean?"
"ask me joan crawford."
"september thirty, nineteen fifty-five. james dean dies. where is nicholas grappa and what is he

"was she naked?" lasher said.
"to the waist," cotsakis said.
"from which direction?" lasher said.
i watched grappa throw a cracker at murray. he skimmed it backhand like a frisbee.




these gaps in my life."



doing?"
"ask me gable, ask me monroe."


"the silver porsche approaches an intersection, going like a streak. no time to brake for the ford
sedan. glass shatters, metal screams. jimmy dean sits in the driver's seat with a broken neck, multiple
fractures  and  lacerations.  it  is  five  forty-five  in  the  afternoon,  pacific  coast  time.  where  is  nicholas
grappa, the jerk-off king of the bronx?"


produce."


and had led security details at rock concerts before joining the faculty here.

flaking skin from your back after a few days at the beach?"

experience of my life."






15

i put on my dark glasses, composed my face and walked into the room. there were twenty-five or thirty
young men and women, many in fall colors, seated in armchairs and sofas and on the beige broadloom.
murray walked among them, speaking, his right hand trembling in a stylized way. when he saw me, he
smiled sheepishly. i stood against the wall, attempting to loom, my arms folded under the black gown.

murray was in the midst of a thoughtful monologue.

"did his mother know that elvis would die young? she talked about assassins. she talked about
the life. the life of a star of this type and magnitude. isn't the life structured to cut you down early? this is
the  point,  isn't  it?  there  are  rules,  guidelines.  if  you  don't  have  the  grace  and  wit  to  die  early,  you  are
forced to vanish, to hide as if in shame and apology. she worried about his sleepwalking. she thought he
might go out a window. i have a feeling about mothers. mothers really do know. the folklore is correct."
"hitler adored his mother," i said.


a surge of attention, unspoken, identifiable only in a certain convergence of stillness, an inward
tensing. murray kept moving, of course, but a bit more deliberately, picking his way between the chairs,
the people seated on the floor. i stood against the wall, arms folded.

approach physical maturity. they talked baby talk to each other all the time."

"hitler was a lazy kid. his report card was full of unsatisfactorys. but klara loved him, spoiled him,
gave him the attention his father failed to give him. she was a quiet woman, modest and religious, and a
good cook and housekeeper."

lashed out at any kid who tried to bully him."

"hitler fantasized. he took piano lessons, made sketches of museums and villas. he sat around
the house a lot. klara tolerated this. he was the first of her children to survive infancy. three others had
died."



"elvis confided in gladys. he brought his girlfriends around to meet her."
"hitler wrote a poem to his mother. his mother and his niece were the women with the greatest

"elvis and gladys liked to nuzzle and pet," he said. "they slept in the same bed until he began to

"gladys  walked  elvis  to  school  and  back  every  day.  she  defended  him  in  little  street  rumbles,



36

"elvis could hardly bear to let gladys out of his sight when her condition grew worse. he kept a

"when  his  mother  became  severely  ill,  hitler  put  a  bed  in  the  kitchen  to  be  closer  to  her.  he

"for the rest of his life, hitler could not bear to be anywhere near christmas decorations because

"years later, in the grip of self-myth and deep remoteness, hitler kept a portrait of his mother in

"elvis fell apart with grief when gladys died. he fondled and petted her in the casket. he talked

hold on his mind."
"when  elvis  went  into  the  army,  gladys  became  ill  and  depressed.  she  sensed  something,

maybe  as  much  about  herself  as  about  him.  her  psychic  apparatus  was  flashing  all  the  wrong  signals.
foreboding and gloom."
"there's not much doubt that hitler was what we call a mama's boy."

a note-taking young man murmured absently, "mutter-söhnchen." i regarded him warily. then, on

an  impulse,  i  abandoned  my  stance  at  the  wall  and  began  to  pace  the  room  like  murray,  occasionally
pausing to gesture, to listen, to gaze out a window or up at the ceiling.

vigil -at the hospital."

cooked and cleaned."

baby talk to her until she was in the ground."
"klara's  funeral  cost  three  hundred  and  seventy  kronen.  hitler  wept  at  the  grave  and  fell  into  a

period of depression and self-pity. he felt an intense loneliness. he'd lost not only his beloved mother but
also his sense of home and hearth."

"it seems fairly certain that gladys's death caused a fundamental shift at the center of the king's
world view.  she'd been his anchor, his sense of security. he began  to withdraw  from  the real world, to
enter the state of his own dying."

his mother had died near a christmas tree."

"elvis made death threats, received death threats. he took mortuary tours and became interested
in ufos. he began to study the bardo thödol, commonly known as the tibetan book of the dead. this is
a guide to dying and being reborn."

his spartan quarters at obersalzberg. he began to hear a buzzing in his left ear."
murray and i passed each other near the center of the room, almost colliding. alfonse stompanato

entered, followed by several students, drawn perhaps by some magnetic wave of excitation, some frenzy
in the air. he settled his surly bulk in a chair as murray and i circled each other and headed off in opposite
directions, avoiding an exchange of looks.

"elvis  fulfilled  the  terms  of  the  contract.  excess,  deterioration,  self-destructiveness,  grotesque
behavior,  a  physical  bloating  and  a  series  of  insults  to  the  brain,  self-delivered.  his  place  in  legend  is
secure. he bought off the skeptics by dying early, horribly, unnecessarily. no one could deny him now. his
mother probably saw it all, as on a nineteen-inch screen, years before her own death."

pace and gesture alone, secure in my professional aura of power, madness and death.

"hitler called himself  the lonely wanderer out of nothingness. he sucked on  lozenges, spoke  to
people in endless monologues, free-associating, as if the language came from some vastness beyond the
world and he was simply the  medium of revelation. it's interesting to wonder if he looked back from the
führerbunker, beneath the burning city, to the early days of his power. did he think of the small groups of
tourists who visited the little settlement where his mother was born and where he'd spent summers with
his  cousins,  riding  in  ox  carts  and  making  kites?  they  came  to  honor  the  site,  klara's  birthplace.  they
entered  the  farmhouse,  poked  around  tentatively.  adolescent  boys  climbed  on  the  roof.  in  time  the
numbers began to increase. they took pictures, slipped small items into their pockets. then crowds came,
mobs of people overrunning the courtyard and singing patriotic songs, painting swastikas on the walls, on
the flanks of  farm animals. crowds came to his mountain villa, so  many people he had to stay indoors.
they picked up pebbles where he'd walked and took them home as souvenirs. crowds came to hear
him  speak,  crowds  erotically  charged,  the  masses  he  once  called  his  only  bride.  he  closed  his  eyes,
clenched his fists as he spoke, twisted his sweat-drenched body, remade his voice as a thrilling weapon.
'sex  murders,'  someone  called  these  speeches.  crowds  came  to  be  hypnotized  by  the  voice,  the  party
anthems, the torchlight parades."
i stared at the carpet and counted silently to seven.

"but wait. how familiar this all seems, how close to ordinary. crowds come, get worked up, touch

and press-- people eager to be transported. isn't this ordinary? we know all this. there must have been
something  different  about  those  crowds.  what  was  it?  let  me  whisper  the  terrible  word,  from  the  old
english, from the old german, from the old norse. death. many of those crowds were assembled in the
name of death. they were there to attend tributes to the dead. processions, songs, speeches, dialogues

murray, happily deferring to me, went to a corner of the room and sat on the floor, leaving me to

 37

with  the  dead, recitations of the names of  the dead.  they were  there  to see pyres and  flaming wheels,
thousands of flags dipped in salute, thousands of uniformed mourners. there were ranks and squadrons,
elaborate backdrops, blood banners and black dress uniforms. crowds came to form a shield against their
own dying. to become a crowd is to keep out death. to break off from the crowd is to risk death as an
individual,  to  face  dying  alone.  crowds  came  for  this  reason  above  all  others.  they  were  there  to  be  a
crowd."

murray  sat  across  the  room.  his  eyes  showed  a  deep  gratitude.  i  had  been  generous  with  the
power and madness at my disposal, allowing my subject to be associated with an infinitely lesser figure, a
fellow who sat in la-z-boy chairs and shot out tvs. it was not a small matter. we all had an aura
to maintain, and in sharing mine with a friend i was risking the very thing
s that made me untouchable.

people gathered round, students and staff, and in the mild din of half heard remarks and orbiting
voices i realized we were now a crowd. not that i needed a crowd around me now. least of all now. death
was strictly a professional matter here. i was comfortable with it, i was on top of it. murray made his way
to my side and escorted me from the room, parting the crowd with his fluttering hand.


16

this  was  the  day  wilder  started  crying  at  two  in  the  afternoon.  at  six  he  was  still  crying,  sitting  on  the
kitchen  floor  and  looking  through  the  oven  window,  and  we  ate  dinner  quickly,  moving  around  him  or
stepping over him to reach the stove and refrigerator. babette watched him as she ate. she had a class to
teach in sitting, standing and walking. it would start in an hour and a half. she looked at me in a drained
and supplicating way. she'd spoken soothingly to him, hefted and caressed him, checked his teeth, given
him a bath, examined him, tickled him, fed him, tried to get him to crawl into his vinyl play tunnel. her old
people would be waiting in the church basement.

it was rhythmic crying, a measured statement of short urgent pulses. at times it seemed he would
break  off  into  a  whimper,  an  animal  complaint,  irregular  and  exhausted,  but  the  rhythm  held,  the
heightened beat, the washed pink sorrow in his face.
"we'll take him to the doctor," i said. "then i'll drop you at the church."

"would the doctor see a crying child? besides, his doctor doesn't have hours now."

"what about your doctor?"

"i think he does. but a crying child, jack. what can i say to the man? 'my child is crying.'"

"is there a condition more basic?"


there'd been no sense of crisis until now. just exasperation and despair. but once we decided to
visit  the  doctor,  we  began  to  hurry,  to  fret.  we  looked  for  wilder's  jacket  and  shoes,  tried  to  remember
what he'd eaten in the last twenty-four hours, anticipated questions the doctor would ask and rehearsed
our answers carefully. it seemed vital to agree on the answers even if we weren't sure they were correct.
doctors lose interest in people who contradict each other. this fear has long informed my relationship with
doctors,  that  they would lose interest in  me, instruct their receptionists to call other names before  mine,
take my dying for granted.

i  waited  in  the  car  while  babette  and  wilder  went  into  the  medical  building  at  the  end  of  elm.
doctors' offices depress me even more than hospitals do because of their air of negative expectancy and
because of the occasional patient who leaves with good news, shaking the doctor's antiseptic hand and
laughing loudly, laughing at everything the doctor says, booming with laughter, with crude power, making
a point of ignoring the other patients as he walks past the waiting room still laughing provocatively-- he is
already clear of them, no longer associated with their weekly gloom, their anxious inferior dying. i would
rather visit an emergency ward, some urban well of trembling, where people come in gut-shot, slashed,
sleepy-eyed with opium compounds, broken needles in their arms. these things have nothing to do with
my own eventual death, nonviolent, small-town, thoughtful.

they  came  out  of  the  small  bright  lobby  onto  the  street.  it  was  cold,  empty  and  dark.  the  boy
walked next to his mother, holding her hand, still crying, and they seemed a picture of such amateurish
sadness and calamity that  i nearly started laughing--laughing not at  the sadness but at the picture they
made  of  it,  at  the  disparity  between  their  grief  and  its  appearances.  my  feelings  of  tenderness  and  pity
were  undermined  by  the  sight  of  them  crossing  the  sidewalk  in  their  bundled  clothing,  the  child
determinedly  weeping,  his  mother  drooping  as  she  walked,  wild-haired,  a  wretched  and  pathetic  pair.
they  were  inadequate  to  the  spoken  grief,  the  great  single-minded  anguish.  does  this  explain  the
existence of professional mourners? they keep a wake from lapsing into comic pathos.



38

"what do we do?"
"think of something," she said.
"there's still fifteen minutes before your class is due to start. let's take him to the hospital, to the

"you  can't  take  a  child  to  an  emergency  ward  because  he's  crying.  if  anything  is  not  an

"what did the doctor say?"
"give him an aspirin and put him to bed."
"that's what denise said."
"i told him that. he said, 'well, why didn't you do it?'"
"why didn't we?"
"she's a child, not a doctor--that's why."
"did you tell him that?"
"i don't know what i told him," she said, "i'm never in control of what i say to doctors, much less









what they say to me. there's some kind of disturbance in the air."
"i know exactly what you mean."

"it's like having a conversation during a spacewalk, dangling in those heavy suits."

"everything drifts and floats."

"i lie to doctors all the time."

"so do i."

"but why?" she said.


as i started the car i realized his crying had changed in pitch and quality. the rhythmic urgency
had  given  way  to  a  sustained,  inarticulate  and  mournful  sound.  he  was  keening  now.  these  were
expressions  of  mideastern  lament,  of  an  anguish  so  accessible  that  it  rushes  to  overwhelm  whatever
immediately caused it. there was something permanent and soul-struck in this crying. it was a sound of
inbred desolation.



emergency entrance. just to see what they say."

emergency, this would be it."
"i'll wait in the car," i said.

"what do i tell them? 'my child is crying.' do they even have an emergency ward?"

"don't you remember? we took the stovers this past summer."

"why?"

"their car was being repaired."

"never mind."

"they inhaled the spray mist from some kind of stain remover."

"take me to my class," she said.


posture.  when  i  pulled  up  in  front  of  the  church,  some  of  her  students  were  walking  down  the
steps to the basement entrance. babette looked at her son--a searching, pleading and desperate look. he
was in the sixth hour of his crying. she ran along the sidewalk and into the building.

i thought of taking him to the hospital. but if a doctor who examined the boy thoroughly in his cozy
office  with  paintings  on  the  wall  in  elaborate  gilded  frames  could  find  nothing  wrong,  then  what  could
emergency technicians do, people trained to leap on chests and pound at static hearts?
i  picked  him  up  and  set  him  against  the  steering  wheel,  facing  me,  his  feet  on  my  thighs.  the

huge lament continued, wave on wave.  it was a sound so large and pure i could almost listen to it, try
consciously  to  apprehend  it,  as  one  sets  up  a  mental  register  in  a  concert  hall  or  theater.  he  was  not
sniveling or blubbering. he was crying out, saying nameless things in a way that touched me with its depth
and richness. this was an ancient dirge all the more impressive for its resolute monotony. ululation. i held
him upright with a hand under each arm. as the crying continued, a curious shift developed in my thinking.
i found that i did not necessarily wish him to stop. it might not be so terrible, i thought, to have to sit and
listen  to  this  a  while  longer.  we  looked  at  each  other.  behind  that  dopey  countenance,  a  complex
intelligence  operated.  i  held  him  with  one  hand,  using  the  other  to  count  his  fingers  inside  the  mittens,
aloud, in german. the inconsolable crying went on. i let it wash over me, like rain in sheets. i entered it, in
a sense. i let it fall and tumble across my face and chest. i began to think he had disappeared inside this
wailing  noise  and  if  i  could  join  him  in  his  lost  and  suspended  place  we  might  together  perform  some
reckless wonder of intelligibility. i let it break across my body. it might not be so terrible, i thought, to have
to sit here for four more hours, with the motor running and the heater on, listening to this uniform lament. it
might be  good, it might be strangely soothing.  i entered it, fell into  it, letting it enfold and cover  me. he
cried  with  his  eyes  open,  his  eyes  closed,  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  his  mittens  on  and  off.  i  sat  there
nodding  sagely.  on  an  impulse  i  turned  him  around,  sat  him  on  my  lap  and  started  up  the  car,  letting
wilder steer. we'd done this once before, for a distance of twenty yards, at sunday dusk, in august, our

 39

street  deep  in  drowsy  shadow.  again  he  responded,  crying  as  he  steered,  as  we  turned  corners,  as  i
brought the car to a halt back at the congregational church. i set him on my left leg, an arm around him,
drawing him toward me, and let my mind drift toward near sleep. the sound moved into a fitful distance.
now and then a car went by. i leaned against the door, faintly aware of his breath on my thumb. some
time later babette was knocking on the window and wilder was crawling across the seat to lift the latch for
her. she got in, adjusted his hat, picked a crumpled tissue off the floor.

we were halfway home when the crying stopped. it stopped suddenly, without a change in tone
and intensity. babette said nothing, i kept my eyes on the road. he sat between us, looking into the radio.
i waited for  babette  to glance  at me behind  his back, over his head,  to show relief, happiness,  hopeful
suspense. i didn't know how i felt and wanted a clue. but she looked straight ahead as if fearful that any
change  in  the  sensitive  texture  of  sound,  movement,  expression  would  cause  the  crying  to  break  out
again.

at  the  house  no  one  spoke.  they  all  moved  quietly  from  room  to  room,  watching  him  distantly,
with sneaky and respectful looks. when he asked for some milk, denise ran softly to the kitchen, barefoot,
in  her  pajamas,  sensing  that  by  economy  of  movement  and  lightness  of  step  she  might  keep  from
disturbing the grave and dramatic air he had brought with him into the house. he drank the milk down in a
single powerful swallow, still fully dressed, a mitten pinned to his sleeve.

they watched him with something like awe. nearly seven straight hours of serious crying. it was
as though he'd just returned from a period of wandering in some remote and holy place, in sand barrens
or  snowy  ranges--a  place  where  things  are  said,  sights  are  seen,  distances  reached  which  we  in  our
ordinary toil can only regard with the  mingled reverence and wonder we hold in reserve  for feats of the
most sublime and difficult dimensions.


17

babette said to me in bed one night, "isn't it great having all these kids around?"
"there'll be one more soon."

"who?"

"bee is coming in a couple of days."

"good. who else can we get?"

the next day denise decided to confront her mother directly about the medication she was or was

not  taking,  hoping  to  trick  babette  into  a  confession,  an  admission  or  some  minimal  kind  of  flustered
response. this was not a tactic the girl and i had discussed but i couldn't help admiring the boldness of
her timing. all six of us were jammed into the car on our way to the mid-village mall and denise simply
waited for a natural break in the conversation, directing her question toward the back of babette's head, in
a voice drained of inference.




africa."

they travel all over the world."



what they were looking for."

they're called origamis."








"and the movie was called the long hot summer," her mother said.
"the long hot summer," heinrich said, "happens to be a play by tennessee ernie williams."
"it doesn't matter," babette said, "because you can't copyright titles anyway."
"if she's an african," steffie said, "i wonder if she ever rode a camel."
'try an audi turbo."
"try a toyota supra."
"what  is  it  camels  store  in  their  humps?"  babette  said.  "food  or  water?  i  could  never  get  that

"what do you know about dylar?"
"is that the black girl who's staying with the stovers?"
"that's dakar," steffie said.
"dakar  isn't  her  name,  it's  where  she's  from,"  denise  said.  "it's  a  country  on  the  ivory  coast  of

"the  capital  is  lagos,"  babette  said.  "i  know  that  because  of  a  surfer  movie  i  saw  once  where

"the perfect wave" heinrich said. "i saw it on tv."
"but what's the girl's name?" steffie said.
"i don't know," babette said, "but the movie wasn't called the perfect wave. the perfect wave is

'they  go  to  hawaii,"  denise  told  steffie,  "and  wait  for  these  tidal  waves  to  come  from  japan.



40

"there are one-hump camels and two-hump camels," heinrich told her. "so it depends which kind

"are you sure you're not talking about llamas?" heinrich said.
"the llama stayed in  peru," denise said. "peru has the llama, the vicuña and one other animal.

straight."

you're talking about."
"are you telling me a two-hump camel stores food in one hump and water in the other?"

"the important thing about camels," he said, "is that camel meat is considered a delicacy."

"i thought that was alligator meat," denise said.


"who  introduced  the  camel  to  america?"  babette  said.  "they  had  them  out  west  for  a  while  to
carry supplies to coolies who were building the great railroads that met at ogden, utah. i remember my
history exams."


bolivia has tin. chile has copper and iron."
"i'll give anyone in this car five dollars," heinrich said, "if they can name the population of bolivia."

"bolivians," my daughter said.

the family is the cradle of the world's misinformation. there must be something in family life that

generates  factual  error.  over-closeness,  the  noise  and  heat  of  being.  perhaps  something  even  deeper,
like the need to survive. murray says we are fragile creatures surrounded by a world of hostile facts. facts
threaten  our  happiness  and  security.  the  deeper  we  delve  into  the  nature  of  things,  the  looser  our
structure may seem to become. the family process works toward sealing off the world. small errors grow
heads, fictions proliferate. i tell murray that ignorance and confusion can't possibly be the driving forces
behind family solidarity. what an idea, what a subversion. he asks me why the strongest family units exist
in  the  least  developed  societies.  not  to  know  is  a  weapon  of  survival,  he  says.  magic  and  superstition
become entrenched as the powerful orthodoxy of the clan. the family is strongest where objective reality
is most likely to be misinterpreted. what a heartless theory, i say. but murray insists it's true.

in a huge hardware store at the  mall  i saw  eric  massingale, a former  microchip sales engineer
who changed his life by coming out here to join the teaching staff of the computer center at the hill. he
was slim and pale, with a dangerous grin.
"you're not wearing dark glasses, jack."

"i only wear them on campus."

"i get it."


we went our separate ways into the store's deep interior. a great echoing din, as of the extinction
of a species of beast, filled the vast space. people bought twenty-two-foot ladders, six kinds of sandpaper,
power saws that could  fell trees. the aisles were long and bright, filled with oversized brooms, massive
sacks of peat and dung, huge rubbermaid garbage cans. rope hung like tropical fruit, beautifully braided
strands, thick, brown, strong. what a great thing a coil of rope is to look at and feel. i bought fifty feet of
manila hemp just  to  have  it around, show it to my son,  talk about where  it comes from, how it's  made.
people spoke english, hindi, vietnamese, related tongues.


did you get that sweater? is that a turkish army sweater? mail order, right?"
he looked me over, felt the material of the water-repellent jacket i was carrying draped across my

arm.  then  he  backed  up,  altering  his  perspective,  nodding  a  little,  his  grin  beginning  to  take  on  a  self-
satisfied look, reflecting some inner calculation.
"i think i know those shoes," he said.

what did he mean, he knew these shoes?

"you're a different person altogether."

"different in what way, eric?"

"you won't take offense?" he said, the grin turning lascivious, rich with secret meaning.

"of course not. why would i?"

"promise you won't take offense."

"i won't take offense."

"you look so harmless, jack. a big, harmless, aging, indistinct sort of guy."

"why would i take offense?" i said, paying for my rope and hurrying out  the door.

the encounter put me in the mood to shop. i found the others and we walked across two parking

lots to the main structure in the mid-village mall, a  ten-story building arranged around a center court  of
waterfalls, promenades and gardens. babette and the kids followed me into the elevator, into the shops
set along  the  tiers,  through the emporiums and department stores, puzzled but excited  by my desire  to
buy.  when  i  could  not  decide  between  two  shirt"  they  encouraged  me  to  buy  both.  when  i  said  i  was

i ran into massingale again at the cash terminals.
"i've never seen you off campus, jack. you look different without your glasses and gown. where

 41

hungry, they fed me pretzels, beer, souvlaki. the two girls scouted ahead, spotting things they thought i
might want or need, running back to get  me, to clutch my arms, plead with me to follow. they were my
guides  to endless well-being.  people swarmed  through the  boutiques and gourmet shops. organ  music
rose from  the great court. we smelled chocolate, popcorn, cologne; we smelled rugs and furs, hanging
salamis and deathly vinyl. my family gloried in the event. i was one of them, shopping, at last. they gave
me advice, badgered clerks on my behalf. i kept seeing myself unexpectedly in some reflecting surface.
we moved from store to store, rejecting not only items in certain departments, not only entire departments
but  whole  stores,  mammoth  corporations  that  did  not  strike  our  fancy  for  one  reason  or  another.  there
was always another store, three floors, eight floors, basement full of cheese graters and paring knives. i
shopped with reckless abandon. i shopped for immediate needs and distant contingencies. i shopped for
its own sake, looking and touching, inspecting merchandise i had no intention of buying, then buying it. i
sent clerks into their fabric books and pattern books to search for elusive designs. i began to grow in value
and  self-regard.  i  filled  myself  out,  found  new  aspects  of  myself,  located  a  person  i'd  forgotten  existed.
brightness settled around me. we crossed from furniture to men's wear, walking through cosmetics. our
images  appeared  on  mirrored  columns,  in  glassware  and  chrome,  on  tv  monitors  in  security  rooms.  i
traded money for goods. the more money i spent, the less important it seemed. i was bigger than these
sums. these sums poured off my skin like so much rain. these sums in fact came back to me in the form
of existential credit. i felt expansive, inclined to be sweepingly generous, and told the kids to pick out their
christmas gifts here and now. i gestured in what i felt was an expansive manner. i could  tell  they were
impressed. they fanned out across the area, each of them suddenly inclined to be private, shadowy, even
secretive. periodically one of them would return to register the name of an item with babette, careful not to
let the others know what it was. i myself was not to be bothered with tedious details. i was the benefactor,
the  one who dispenses  gifts, bonuses,  bribes, baksheesh.  the children knew it was  the nature  of such
things that i could not be expected to engage in technical discussions about the gifts themselves. we ate
another meal.  a band played live  muzak. voices rose ten stories from  the gardens  and promenades, a
roar that echoed and swirled through the vast gallery, mixing with noises from the tiers, with shuffling feet
and chiming bells, the hum of escalators, the sound of people eating, the human buzz of some vivid and
happy transaction.

we drove home in silence. we went to our respective rooms, wishing to be alone. a little later i
watched  steffie in front of the tv set.  she moved her lips, attempting to  match the words as they were
spoken.


18

it is the nature and pleasure of townspeople to distrust the city. all the guiding principles that might flow
from a center of ideas and cultural energies are regarded as corrupt, one or another kind of pornography.
this is how it is with towns.

but blacksmith is nowhere near a large city. we don't feel threatened and aggrieved in quite the
same way other towns do. we're not smack in the path of history and its contaminations. if our complaints
have a focal point, it would have to be the tv set, where the outer torment lurks, causing fears and secret
desires.  certainly  little  or  no  resentment  attaches  to  the  college-on-the-hill  as  an  emblem  of  ruinous
influence.  the  school  occupies  an  ever  serene  edge  of  the  townscape,  semidetached,  more  or  less
scenic, suspended in political calm. not a place designed to aggravate suspicions.
in light snow i drove to the airport outside iron city, a large town sunk in confusion, a center of

abandonment and broken glass rather than a place of fully realized urban decay. bee, my twelve-year-old,
was due in on a flight from washington, with two stops and one change of planes along the way. but it
was her mother, tweedy browner, who showed up in the arrivals area, a small dusty third-world place in a
state  of  halted  renovation.  for  a  moment  i  thought  bee  was  dead  and  tweedy  had  come  to  tell  me  in
person.


boston tomorrow. family business."





"where is bee?"
"she's  flying  in  later  today.  that's  why  i'm  here.  to  spend  some  time  with  her.  i  have  to  go  to

"but where is she?"
"with her father."
"i'm her father, tweedy."
"malcolm hunt, stupid. my husband."



42

"is she coming alone?"
"why wouldn't she be?"
"from the far east to iron city can't be that simple."
"bee can cope when she has to. she wants to be a travel writer as a matter of actual fact. sits a

"he's your husband, he's not her father."

"do you still love me, tuck?" she said.


she called me tuck, which is what her mother used to call her father. all the male browners were
called tuck. when the line began to pale, producing a series of aesthetes and incompetents, they gave
the  name  to  any  man  who  married  into  the  family,  within  reason.  i  was  the  first  of  these  and  kept
expecting to hear a note of overrefined irony in their voices when they called me by that name. i thought
that when tradition becomes too flexible, irony enters the voice. nasality, sarcasm, self-caricature and so
on. they would punish me by mocking themselves. but they were sweet about it, entirely sincere, even
grateful to me for allowing them to carry on.

she wore a shetland sweater, tweed skirt, knee socks and penny loafers. there was a sense of
protestant  disrepair  about  her,  a  collapsed  aura  in  which  her  body  struggled  to  survive.  the  fair  and
angular face, the slightly bulging eyes, the signs of strain and complaint that showed about the mouth an
d around the eyes, the pulsing at the temple, the raised veins in the hands and neck. cigarette ash clung
to the loose weave of her sweater.
"for the third time. where is she?"


"indonesia, more or less. malcolm's working in deep cover, sponsoring a communist revival. it's
part of an elegant scheme  designed  to  topple castro. let's get out  of here,  tuck, before children come
swarming around to beg."




horse well."

she took a deep drag on her cigarette and exhaled smoke in rapid expert streams from nose and
mouth,  a  routine  she  used  when  she  wanted  to  express  impatience  with  her  immediate  surroundings.
there  were  no  bars  or  restaurants  at  the  airport--just  a  stand  with  prepackaged  sandwiches,  presided
over  by  a  man  with  sect  marks  on  his  face.  we  got  tweedy's  luggage,  went  out  to  the  car  and  drove
through iron city, past deserted factories, on mainly deserted avenues, a city of hills, occasional cobbled
streets, fine old homes here and there, holiday wreaths in the windows.




diplomat who secretly runs agents in and out of sensitive and inaccessible areas."


train windows or wind-blown north from the depot.



estate, tax shelters. it's what janet has always wanted. peace of mind in a profit-oriented context."
"marvelous bone structure, janet."

"she had a talent for stealth."

"you say that with such bitterness. i've never known you to be bitter, tuck."

"stupid but not bitter."

"what do you mean by stealth? was she covert, like malcolm?"


"she wouldn't tell me how much money she made. i think she used to read my mail. right after
heinrich  was  born,  she  got  me  involved  in  a  complex  investment  scheme  with  a  bunch  of  multilingual
people. she said she had information."
"but she was wrong and you lost vast sums."


"we  made  vast  sums.  i  was  entangled,  enmeshed.  she  was  always  maneuvering.  my  security
was threatened. my sense of a long and uneventful life. she wanted to incorporate us. we got phone calls
from liechtenstein, the hebrides. fictional places, plot devices."

high cheekbones and wry voice."

babette and her long fleshy face."


"tuck, i'm not happy."
"why not?"
"i thought you'd love me forever, frankly. i depend on you for that. malcolm's away so much."
"we get a  divorce, you  take all  my money, you  marry a well-to-do, well-connected, well-tailored

"you  all  had  high  cheekbones.  every  one  of  you.  marvelous  bone  structure.  thank  god  for

"isn't there somewhere we can get a civilized meal?"  tweedy said. "a  tableclothy place with icy

"malcolm has always been drawn to jungly places."
we were traveling parallel to railroad tracks. the weeds were full of styrofoam cups, tossed from

"janet has been drawn to montana, to an ashram," i said.
"janet savory? good god, whatever for?"
"her name is mother devi now. she operates the ashram's business activities. investments, real

"that doesn't sound like  the janet savory i spent a delightful half hour with. the janet with the

 43

malcolm and i once took tea with colonel qaddafi. a charming and ruthless man, one of the few

"god, tuck, we were good together."
"good at what?"
"fool, you're supposed to look at me in a fond and nostalgic way, smiling ruefully."
"you wore gloves to bed."
"i still do."
"gloves, eyeshades and socks."
"you know my flaws. you always did. i'm ultrasensitive to many things."
"sunlight, air, food, water, sex."
"carcinogenic, every one of them."
"what's the family business in boston all about?"
"i  have  to  reassure  my  mother  that  malcolm  isn't  dead.  she's  taken  quite  a  shine  to  him,  for

pats of butter.

terrorists we've met who lives up to his public billing."

the snow had stopped  falling. we drove through a warehouse district,  more deserted streets, a
bleakness  and  anonymity  that  registered  in  the  mind  as  a  ghostly  longing  for  something  that  was  far
beyond retrieval. there were lonely cafes, another stretch of track, freight cars paused at a siding.
tweedy chain-smoked extra-longs, shooting exasperated streams of smoke in every direction.











whatever reason."
"why does she think he's dead?"


"when  malcolm  goes  into  deep  cover,  it's  as  though  he  never  existed.  he  disappears  not  only
here and now but retroactively. no trace of the man remains. i sometimes wonder if the man i'm married
to is in fact malcolm hunt or a completely different person who is himself operating under deep cover. it's
frankly worrisome. i  don't know which half of  malcolm's life  is real, which  half is intelligence.  i'm hoping
bee can shed some light."

traffic  lights  swayed  on  cables  in  a  sudden  gust.  this  was  the  city's  main  street,  a  series  of
discount  stores,  check-cashing  places,  wholesale  outlets.  a  tall  old  moorish  movie  theater,  now
remarkably a mosque. blank structures called the terminal building, the packer building, the commerce
building. how close this was to a classic photography of regret.
"a gray day in iron city," i said. "we may as well go back to the airport."

"how is hitler?"

"fine, solid, dependable."

"you look good, tuck."

"i don't feel good."


"you never felt good. you're the old tuck. you were always the old tuck. we loved each other,
didn't we? we told each other everything, within the limits of one's preoccupation with breeding and tact.
malcolm tells me nothing. who is he? what does he do?"

the rubber mat.

wore blue blazers and crisp gray flannels?"


was."

at the airport we waited in a mist of plaster dust, among exposed wires, mounds of rubble. half an
hour before bee was due to arrive, the passengers from another flight began filing through a drafty tunnel
into  the  arrivals  area.  they  were  gray  and  stricken,  they  were  stooped  over  in  weariness  and  shock,
dragging their hand luggage across the floor. twenty, thirty, forty people came out, without a word or look,
keeping  their  eyes to  the ground.  some limped, some wept.  more came  through the tunnel, adults with
whimpering  children,  old  people  trembling,  a  black  minister  with  his  collar  askew,  one  shoe  missing.
tweedy helped a woman with two small kids. i approached a young man, a stocky fellow with a mailman's
cap  and  beer  belly,  wearing  a  down  vest,  and  he  looked  at  me  as  if  i  didn't  belong  in  his  space-time
dimension but had crossed over illegally, made a rude incursion. i forced him to stop and face me, asked
him  what  had  happened  up  there.  as  people  kept  filing  past,  he  exhaled  wearily.  then  he  nodded,  his
eyes steady on mine, full of a gentle resignation.

the  plane  had  lost  power  in  all  three  engines,  dropped  from  thirty-four  thousand  feet  to  twelve
thousand feet. something like four miles. when the steep glide began, people rose, fell, collided, swam in
their seats. then the serious screaming and moaning began. almost immediately a voice from the flight

"don't ask me."
"mother used to stand in the arbor with an armful of cut flowers. just stand there, being what she

she sat with her legs tucked under her, facing me, and flicked ashes into her shoes, which sat on

"wasn't it marvelous to grow up tall and straight, among geldings and mares, with a daddy who



44

as the man in the down vest told the story, passengers from the tunnel began gathering around

deck was heard on the intercom: "we're falling out of the sky! we're going down! we're a silver gleaming
death  machine!"  this  outburst  struck  the  passengers  as  an  all  but  total  breakdown  of  authority,
competence and command presence and it brought on a round of fresh and desperate wailing.

objects were rolling out of the galley, the aisles were full of drinking glasses, utensils, coats and
blankets.  a  stewardess  pinned  to  the  bulkhead  by  the  sharp  angle  of  descent  was  trying  to  find  the
relevant passage in a handbook titled "manual of disasters." then there was a second male voice from
the flight deck, this one remarkably calm and precise, making the passengers believe there was someone
in charge after all, an element of hope: "this is american two-one-three to the cockpit voice recorder. now
we know what it's like.  it is worse  than we'd ever imagined. they didn't prepare us  for this at the death
simulator in denver. our fear is pure, so totally stripped of distractions and pressures as to be a form of
transcendental meditation. in less than three minutes we will touch down, so to speak. they will find our
bodies in some smoking field, strewn about in the grisly attitudes of death. i love you, lance." this time
there  was  a  brief  pause  before  the  mass  wailing  recommenced.  lance?  what  kind  of  people  were  in
control of this aircraft? the crying took on a bitter and disillusioned tone.

us. no one spoke, interrupted, tried to embellish the account.

aboard  the  gliding  craft,  a  stewardess  crawled  down  the  aisle,  over  bodies  and  debris,  telling
people  in  each  row  to  remove  their  shoes,  remove  sharp  objects  from  their  pockets,  assume  a  fetal
position. at the other end of the plane, someone was wrestling with a flotation device. certain elements in
the crew had decided to pretend that it was not a crash but a crash landing that was seconds away. after
all,  the  difference  between  the  two  is  only  one  word.  didn't  this  suggest  that  the  two  forms  of  flight
termination  were  more  or  less  interchangeable?  how  much  could  one  word  matter?  an  encouraging
question under the circumstances, if you didn't think about it too long, and there was no time to think right
now.  the  basic  difference  between  a  crash  and  a  crash  landing  seemed  to  be  that  you  could  sensibly
prepare for a crash landing, which is exactly what they were trying to do.  the news spread through the
plane, the term was repeated in row after row. "crash landing, crash landing." they saw how easy it was,
by adding  one word,  to  maintain a grip on  the  future, to extend  it  in consciousness if  not in actual fact.
they patted themselves for ballpoint pens, went fetal in their seats.

by the time the narrator reached this point in his account, many people were crowded around, not
only people who'd just emerged from the tunnel but also those who'd been among the first to disembark.
they'd come back to listen. they were not yet ready to disperse, to reinhabit their earthbound bodies, but
wanted  to linger with  their  terror, keep it separate and intact  for just a while longer.  more people drifted
toward  us,  milled  about,  close  to  the  entire  planeload.  they  were  content  to  let  the  capped  and  vested
man  speak  on  their  behalf.  no  one  disputed  his  account  or  tried  to  add  individual  testimony.  it  was  as
though they were being told of an event they hadn't personally been involved in. they were interested in
what he said, even curious, but also clearly detached. they trusted him to tell them what they'd said and
felt.

it was at this point in the descent, as the term "crash landing" spread  through  the plane, with  a
pronounced vocal stress on the second word, that passengers in first class came scrambling and clawing
through the curtains, literally climbing their way into the tourist section in order to avoid being the first to
strike the ground. there were those in tourist who felt they ought to be made to go back. this sentiment
was  expressed  not  so  much  in  words  and  actions  as  in  terrible  and  inarticulate  sounds,  mainly  cattle
noises,  an  urgent  and  force-fed  lowing.  suddenly  the  engines  restarted.  just  like  that.  power,  stability,
control. the passengers, prepared  for impact, were slow to adjust to  the new wave of information. new
sounds, a different flight path, a sense of being encased in solid tubing and not some polyurethane wrap.
the smoking sign went on, an international hand with a cigarette. stewardesses appeared with scented
towelettes for cleaning blood and vomit. people slowly came out of their fetal positions, sat back limply.
four  miles  of  prime-time  terror.  no  one  knew  what  to  say.  being  alive  was  a  richness  of  sensation.
dozens of things, hundreds of  things. the  first officer walked down the aisle, smiling and chatting in an
empty pleasant corporate way. his  face had  the rosy  and confident polish that is  familiar in handlers of
large passenger aircraft. they looked at him and wondered why they'd been afraid.

i'd been pushed away  from  the  narrator  by people crowding  in  to listen, well over a hundred of
them,  dragging  their  shoulder  bags  and  garment  bags  across  the  dusty  floor.  just  as  i  realized  i  was
almost out of hearing range, i saw bee standing next to me, her small face smooth and white in a mass of
kinky hair. she jumped up into my embrace, smelling of jet exhaust.




"where's the media?" she said.
"there is no media in iron city."
"they went through all that for nothing?"

 45

up ahead the taillights danced, the line began to move.
barring mechanical failures, turbulent weather and terrorist acts, tweedy said, an aircraft traveling


we found tweedy and headed out to the car. there was a traffic jam on the outskirts of the city
and  we  had  to  sit  on  a  road  outside  an  abandoned  foundry.  a  thousand  broken  windows,  street  lights
broken,  darkness  settling  in.  bee  sat  in  the  middle  of  the  rear  seat  in  the  lotus  position.  she  seemed
remarkably well rested after a journey that had spanned time zones, land masses, vast oceanic distances,
days and nights, on large and small planes, in summer and winter, from surabaya to iron city. now we
sat waiting in the dark for a car to get towed or a drawbridge to close. bee didn't think this familiar irony of
modern  travel was worth  a comment. she just sat  there listening  to tweedy explain to me why parents
needn't worry about children taking such trips alone. planes and terminals are the safest of places for the
very young and very old. they are looked after, smiled upon, admired for their resourcefulness and pluck.
people ask friendly questions, offer them blankets and sweets.

"every child ought to have the opportunity to travel thousands of miles alone," tweedy said, "for
the sake of  her self-esteem and independence of  mind, with clothes and toiletries of her own choosing.
the sooner we get them in the air, the better. like swimming or ice skating. you have to start them young.
it's one of the things i'm proudest to have accomplished with bee. i sent her to boston on eastern when
she was nine. i told granny browner not to meet her plane. getting out of airports is every bit as important
as  the  actual  flight.  too  many  parents  ignore  this  phase  of  a  child's  development.  bee  is  thoroughly
bicoastal now. she flew her first jumbo at ten, changed planes at o'hare, had a near miss in los angeles.
two weeks later she took the concorde to london. malcolm was waiting with a split of champagne."


at the speed of sound may be the last refuge of gracious living and civilized manners known to man.


19

bee  made  us  feel  self-conscious  at  times,  a  punishment  that  visitors  will  unintentionally  inflict  on  their
complacent hosts. her presence seemed to radiate a surgical light. we began to see ourselves as a group
that acted without design, avoided making decisions, took turns being stupid and emotionally unstable, left
wet  towels  everywhere,  mislaid  our  youngest  member.  whatever  we  did  was  suddenly  a  thing  that
seemed to need explaining. my wife was especially disconcerted. if denise was a pint-sized commissar,
nagging us to higher conscience, then bee was a silent witness, calling the very meaning of our lives into
question. i watched babette stare into her cupped hands, aghast.
that chirping sound was just the radiator.


bee was  quietly disdainful of wisecracks, sarcasm and other  family business.  a year older than
denise,  she  was  taller,  thinner,  paler,  both  worldly  and  ethereal,  as  though  in  her  heart  she  was  not  a
travel  writer  at  all,  as  her  mother  had  said  she  wished  to  be,  but  simply  a  traveler,  the  purer  form,
someone who collects impressions, dense anatomies of feeling, but does not care to record them.

she was self-possessed and thoughtful, had brought us hand-carved gifts from the jungles. she
took taxis to school and dance class, spoke a little chinese, had once wired money to a stranded friend. i
admired her in a distant and uneasy way, sensing a nameless threat, as if she were not my child at all but
the sophisticated and self-reliant friend of one of my children. was murray right? were we a fragile unit
surrounded by hostile facts? would i promote ignorance, prejudice and superstition to protect my family
from the world?

on  christmas  day,  bee  sat  by  the  fireplace  in  our  seldom  used  living  room,  watching  the
turquoise flames. she wore a long loose khaki outfit that looked casually expensive. i sat in the armchair
with three or four gift boxes in my lap, apparel and tissue paper hanging out. my dog-eared copy of mein
kampf rested on the floor at the side of the chair. some of the other people were in the kitchen preparing
the  meal,  some  had  gone  upstairs  to  investigate  their  gifts  in  private.  the  tv  said:  "this  creature  has
developed a complicated stomach in keeping with its leafy diet."

"i  don't  like  this  business  with  mother,"  bee  said  in  a  voice  of  cultivated  distress.  "she  looks
keyed-up all the  time. like she's worried about something but she's not sure what it  is.  it's malcolm, of
course. he's got his jungle. what does she have? a huge airy kitchen with a stove that belongs in a three-
star restaurant in the provinces. she put all her energy into that kitchen, but for what? it's not a kitchen at
all.  it's  her  life,  her  middle  age.  baba  could  enjoy  a  kitchen  like  that.  it  would  be  a  kitchen  to  her.  to
mother it's like a weird symbol of getting through a crisis, except she hasn't gotten through it."



"your mother is not sure exactly who her husband is."
"that's not the basic problem. the basic problem is that she doesn't know who she is. malcolm is



46

"we're probably having something besides toast," i said.
the  mild  rebuke  made  her  happy.  she  liked  me  best  when  i  was  dry,  derisive  and  cutting,  a

the tv said: "now we will put the little feelers on the butterfly."
in bed two nights later i heard voices, put on my robe and went down the hall to see what was

"is the kitchen on fire?"
"that's steffie burning toast. a thing she does from time to time."
"i could have prepared some kind of kimchi dish."
"something from your korean period."
"it's  cabbage  pickled  with  red  pepper  and  a  bunch  of  other  things.  fiery  hot.  but  i  don't  know

in the highlands living on tree bark and snake. that's who malcolm is. he needs heat and humidity. he's
got like how many degrees in foreign affairs and economics but all he wants to do is squat under a tree
and watch  tribal people pack mud all over their bodies. they're fun  to watch. what does  mother  do  for
fun?"
bee was small-featured except for her eyes, which seemed to contain two forms of life, the subject matter
and its hidden implications. she talked about babette's effortless skills in making things work, the house,
the  kids,  the  flow  of  the  routine  universe,  sounding  a  little  like  me,  but  there  was  a  secondary  sea-life
moving deep in the iris of her eye. what did it  mean,  what was she really saying, why did she seem to
expect me to respond in kind? she wanted to communicate in this secondary way, with optic fluids. she
would  have  her  suspicions  confirmed,  find  out  about  me.  but  what  suspicions  did  she  harbor  and  what
was there to find out? i began to worry. as the odor of burning toast filled the house, i tried to get her to
talk about life in the seventh grade.





about ingredients. they're hard enough to find in washington."


natural talent she believed i'd forfeited through long association with children.


going on. denise stood outside the bathroom door.
"steffie's taking one of her baths."

"it's late," i said.

"she's just sitting in all that dirty water."

"it's my dirt," steffie said from the other side of the door.

"it's still dirt."

"well it's my dirt and i don't care."

"it's dirt," denise said.

"it's my dirt."

"dirt is dirt."

"not when it's mine."


bee appeared at the end of the hall wearing a silver and red kimono. just stood there, distant and
pale.  there  was  a  moment  in  which  our  locus  of  pettiness  and  shame  seemed  palpably  to  expand,  a
cartoon  of  self-awareness.  denise  muttered  something  violent  to  steffie  through  the  crack  in  the  door,
then went quietly to her room.

in the morning i drove bee to the airport. rides to airports make me quiet and glum. we listened
to  news  updates  on  the  radio,  curiously  excited  reports  about  firemen  removing  a  burning  sofa  from  a
tenement  in  watertown,  delivered  in  a  background  clamor  of  ticker-tape  machines.  i  realized  bee  was
watching  me  carefully,  importantly.  she  sat  with  her  back  against  the  door,  her  knees  up,  held  tightly
together,  arms  enfolding  them.  the  look  was  one  of  solemn  compassion.  it  was  a  look  i  did  not
necessarily  trust,  believing  it  had  little  to  do  with  pity  or  love  or  sadness.  i  recognized  it  in  fact  as
something else completely. the adolescent female's tenderest form of condescension.
on the way back from the airport, i got off the expressway at the river road and parked the car at the edge
of the woods. i walked up a steep path. there was an old picket fence with a sign.


the old burying ground

blacksmith village


the headstones were small, tilted, pockmarked, spotted with fungus or moss, the names and dates barely
legible.  the  ground  was  hard,  with  patches  of  ice.  i  walked  among  the  stones,  taking  off  my  gloves  to
touch the rough  marble.  embedded  in the dirt  before  one of  the  markers was a narrow vase containing
three small american flags, the only sign that someone had preceded me  to this place in this century. i
was able to make out some of the names, great strong simple names, suggesting a moral rigor. i stood
and listened.


i was beyond the traffic noise, the intermittent stir of factories across the river. so at least in this

 47

the lieutenant governor of the state died of undisclosed natural causes, after a long illness. we all

a mechanicsville man died outside tokyo during a siege of the airport by ten thousand helmeted

may the days be aimless. let the seasons drift. do not advance the action according to a plan.

they'd been correct, placing the graveyard here, a silence that had stood its ground. the air had a bite. i
breathed deeply, remained in one spot, waiting to feel the peace that is supposed  to descend upon the
dead, waiting to see the light that hangs above the fields of the landscapist's lament.

i stood there, listening.  the wind blew snow from the  branches. snow blew out of the woods in
eddies  and  sweeping  gusts.  i  raised  my  collar,  put  my  gloves  back  on.  when  the  air  was  still  again,  i
walked among  the stones,  trying  to read the names and dates, adjusting  the  flags  to  make  them swing
free. then i stood and listened.

the power of the dead is  that we  think  they see us all the time.  the  dead have a presence.  is
there a level of energy composed solely of the dead? they are also in the ground, of course, asleep and
crumbling. perhaps we are what they dream.



20

mr.  treadwell's  sister  died.  her  first  name  was  gladys.  the  doctor  said  she  died  of  lingering  dread,  a
result of the four days and nights she and her brother had spent in the mid-village mall, lost and confused.

a man in glassboro died when the rear wheel of his car separated from the axle. an idiosyncrasy
of that particular model.

know what that means.

students.

when i read obituaries i always note the age of the deceased. automatically i relate this figure to
my own age. four years to go, i think. nine more years. two years and i'm dead. the power of numbers
is never more evident than when we use them to speculate on the time of our dying. sometimes i bargain
with  myself.  would  i  be  willing  to  accept  sixty-five,  genghis  khan's  age  on  dying?  suleiman  the
magnificent  made  it  to  seventy-six.  that  sounds  all  right,  especially  the  way  i  feel  now,  but  how  will  it
sound when i'm seventy-three?

it's hard to imagine these men feeling sad about death. attila the hun died young. he was still in
his  forties.  did  he  feel  sorry  for  himself,  succumb  to  self-pity  and  depression?  he  was  the  king  of  the
huns, the invader of europe, the scourge of god. i want to believe he lay in his tent, wrapped in animal
skins,  as  in  some  internationally  financed  movie  epic,  and  said  brave  cruel  things  to  his  aides  and
retainers. no weakening of the spirit. no sense of the irony of human existence, that we are the highest
form of life on earth and yet ineffably sad because we know what no other animal knows, that we must
die. attila did not look through the opening in his tent and gesture at some lame dog standing at the edge
of the fire waiting to be thrown a scrap of meat. he did not say, "that pathetic flea-ridden beast is better
off than the greatest ruler of men. it doesn't know what we know, it doesn't feel what we feel, it can't be
sad as we are sad."

i want to believe he was not afraid. he accepted death as an experience that flows naturally from
life, a wild ride through the forest, as would befit someone known as the scourge of god. this is how it
ended for him, with his attendants cutting off their hair and disfiguring their own faces in barbarian tribute,
as the camera pulls back out of the tent and pans across the night sky of the fifth century a. d., clear and
uncontaminated, bright-banded with shimmering worlds.

good, jack."
"what brings this on?"

"i just think it ought to be said."

"do you feel better now that you've said it?"

"i have terrible dreams," she murmured.


who will die first? she says she wants to die first because she would fee l unbearably lonely and
sad  without  me,  especially  if  the  children  were  grown  and  living  elsewhere.  she  is  adamant  about  this.
she  sincerely  wants  to  precede  me.  she  discusses  the  subject  with  such  argumentative  force  that  it's
obvious she thinks we have a choice in the matter. she also thinks nothing can happen to us as long as
there are dependent children in the house. the kids are a guarantee of our relative longevity. we're safe
as long as they're around. but once they get big and scatter, she wants to be the first to go. she sounds
almost  eager.  she  is  afraid  i  will  die  unexpectedly,  sneakily,  slipping  away  in  the  night.  it  isn't  that  she

babette looked up from her eggs and hash browns and said to me with a quiet intensity, "life is



48

doesn't cherish life; it's being left alone that frightens her. the emptiness, the sense of cosmic darkness.
mastercard, visa, american express.


i tell her i want to die first. i've gotten so used to her that i would feel miserably incomplete. we
are two views of the same person. i would spend the rest of my life turning to speak to her. no one there,
a hole in space and time. she claims my death would leave a bigger hole in her life than her death would
leave in mine. this is the level of our discourse. the relative size of holes, abysses and gaps. we have
serious arguments on this level. she says  if her death is capable  of leaving a large hole in my life,  my
death would leave an abyss in hers, a great yawning gulf. i counter with a profound depth or void. and so
it goes into the night. these arguments never seem foolish at the time. such is the dignifying power of our
subject.

she put on a long glossy padded coat--it looked segmented, exoskeletal, designed for the ocean
floor--and went out to teach her class in posture.  steffie  moved soundlessly through the  house carrying
small  plastic  bags  she  used  for  lining  the  wicker  baskets  scattered  about.  she  did  this  once  or  twice  a
week with the quiet and conscientious air of someone who does not want credit for saving lives. murray
came  over  to  talk  to  the  two  girls  and  wilder,  something  he  did  from  time  to  time  as  part  of  his
investigation  into  what  he  called  the  society  of  kids.  he  talked  about  the  otherworldly  babble  of  the
american family. he seemed to think we were a visionary group, open to special forms of consciousness.
there were huge amounts of data flowing through the house, waiting to be analyzed.
he went upstairs with the three kids to watch tv. heinrich walked into the kitchen, sat at the table

and  gripped  a  fork  tightly  in  each  hand.  the  refrigerator  throbbed  massively.  i  flipped  a  switch  and
somewhere  beneath  the  sink  a  grinding  mechanism  reduced  parings,  rinds  and  animal  fats  to  tiny
drainable  fragments, with a motorized surge that  made me retreat two paces. i took the forks out of my
son's hands and put them in the dishwasher.














"murray would also like coffee," i said, aware of a small note of triumph
in my voice.



the counter to get the spoon."
"you're saying i carried the coffee can unnecessarily."


"you carried it in your right hand all the way to the counter, put it down to open the drawer, which
you didn't want to do with your left hand, then got the spoon with your right hand, switched it to your left
hand, picked up the coffee can with your right hand and went back to the stove, where you put it down
again."


a salad sometime."








"do you drink coffee yet?"
"no," he said.
"baba likes a cup when she gets back from class."
"make her tea instead."
"she doesn't like tea."
"she can learn, can't she?"
"the two things have completely different tastes."
"a habit's a habit."
"you have to acquire it first."
"that's what i'm saying. make her tea."
"her class is more demanding than it sounds. coffee relaxes her."
'that's why it's dangerous," he said.
"it's not dangerous."
"whatever relaxes you is dangerous. if you don't know that, i might as well be talking to the wall."

"did you see what you just did? you took the coffee can with you to the counter."
"so what?"
"you didn't have to. you could have left it by the stove where you were standing and then gone to

"that's what people do."
"it's wasted motion. people waste tremendous amounts of motion. you ought to watch baba make

"people don't deliberate over each tiny motion and gesture. a little waste doesn't hurt."
"but over a lifetime?"
"what do you save if you don't waste?"
"over a lifetime? you save tremendous amounts of time and energy," he said.
"what will you do with them?"
"use them to live longer."
the truth is i don't want to die first. given a choice between loneliness and death, it would take

 49

"when  plastic  furniture  burns,  you  get  cyanide  poisoning,"  heinrich  said,  tapping  the  formica

me a fraction of a second to decide. but i don't want to be alone either. everything i say to babette about
holes and gaps is true. her death would leave me scattered, talking to chairs and pillows. don't let us die,
i want to cry out to that fifth century sky ablaze with mystery and spiral light. let us both live forever, in
sickness  and  health,  feebleminded,  doddering,  toothless,  liver-spotted,  dim-sighted,  hallucinating.  who
decides these things? what is out there? who are you?
i watched the coffee bubble up through the center tube and perforated basket into the small pale

globe.  a  marvelous  and  sad  invention,  so  roundabout,  ingenious,  human.  it  was  like  a  philosophical
argument rendered in terms of the things of the world-- water, metal, brown beans. i had never looked at
coffee before.

tabletop.

he ate a winter peach. i poured a cup of coffee for murray and together the boy and i went up the
stairs to denise's room, where the tv set was currently located. the volume was kept way down, the girls
engaged in a rapt dialogue with their guest. murray looked happy to be there. he sat in the middle of the
floor taking notes, his toggle coat and touring cap next to him on the rug. the room around him was rich in
codes and messages, an archaeology of childhood, things denise had carried with her since the age of
three, from cartoon clocks to werewolf posters. she is the kind of child who feels a protective tenderness
toward her own beginnings. it is part of her strategy in a world of displacements to make every effort to
restore  and  preserve,  keep  things  together  for  their  value  as  remembering  objects,  a  way  of  fastening
herself to a life.

make no  mistake.  i  take  these children seriously.  it is not possible to see  too much in them,  to
overindulge your casual gift for the study of character. it is all there, in full force, charged waves of identity
and being. there are no amateurs in the world of children.

heinrich stood in a corner of the room, taking up his critical-observer position. i gave murray his
coffee and was about to leave when i glanced in passing at the tv screen. i paused at the door, looked
more closely this time. it was true, it was there. i hissed at the others for silence and they swiveled their
heads in my direction, baffled and annoyed. then they followed my gaze to the sturdy tv at the end of the
bed.

the face on the screen was babette's. out of our mouths came a silence as wary and deep as an
animal  growl.  confusion,  fear,  astonishment  spilled  from  our  faces.  what  did  it  mean?  what  was  she
doing  there,  in  black  and  white,  framed  in  formal  borders?  was  she  dead,  missing,  disembodied?  was
this her spirit, her secret self, some two-dimensional facsimile released  by the  power of technology, set
free  to  glide  through  wavebands,  through  energy  levels,  pausing  to  say  good-bye  to  us  from  the
fluorescent screen?

a strangeness gripped me, a sense of psychic disorientation. it was her all right, the face, the hair,
the  way  she  blinks  in  rapid  twos  and  threes.  i'd  seen  her  just  an  hour  ago,  eating  eggs,  but  her
appearance on the screen made me think of her as some distant figure from the past, some ex-wife and
absentee mother, a walker in the mists of the dead. if she was not dead, was i? a two-syllable infantile
cry, ba-ba, issued from the deeps of my soul.

all  this compressed in seconds. it was only as time drew on, normalized  itself, returned to us a
sense of our surroundings, the room, the house, the reality in which the tv set stood--it was only then that
we understood what was going on.

babette was  teaching her class in  the church basement and it was being  televised by  the local
cable station. either she hadn't known there would be a camera on hand or she preferred not to tell us, out
of embarrassment, love, superstition, whatever causes a person to wish to withhold her image from those
who know her.

with the sound down low we couldn't hear what she was saying. but no one bothered to adjust
the volume. it was the picture that mattered, the face in black and white, animated but also flat, distanced,
sealed off, timeless. it was but wasn't her. once again i began to think murray might be on to something.
waves and radiation. something leaked through the mesh. she was shining a light on us, she was coming
into  being,  endlessly  being  formed  and  reformed  as  the  muscles  in  her  face  worked  at  smiling  and
speaking, as the electronic dots swarmed.

we were being shot through with babette. her image was projected on our bodies, swam in us
and through us. babette of electrons and photons, of whatever forces produced that gray light we took to
be her face.

the kids were flushed with excitement but i felt a certain disquiet. i tried to tell myself it was only
television--  whatever  that  was,  however  it  worked--and  not  some  journey  out  of  life  or  death,  not  some
mysterious separation. murray looked up at me, smiling in his sneaky way.



50


only wilder remained calm. he watched his mother, spoke to her in half-words, sensible-sounding
fragments that were mainly fabricated. as the camera pulled back to allow babette to demonstrate some
fine point of standing or walking, wilder approached the set and touched her body, leaving a handprint on
the dusty surface of the screen.

then denise crawled up to the set and turned the volume dial. nothing happened. there was no
sound, no voice, nothing. she turned to look at me, a moment of renewed confusion. heinrich advanced,
fiddled with the dial, stuck his hand behind the set to adjust the recessed knobs. when he tried another
channel, the sound boomed out, raw and fuzzy. back at the cable station, he couldn't raise a buzz and as
we watched babette finish the lesson, we were in a mood of odd misgiving. but as soon as the program
ended, the two girls got excited again and went downstairs to wait for babette at the door and surprise her
with news of what they'd seen.

in low heaves and swells, as murray took notes.




the small boy remained at the tv set, within inches of the dark screen, crying softly, uncertainly,

ii

the airborne toxic event



21

after a night of dream-lit snows the air turned clear and still. there was a taut blue quality in the january
light, a hardness and confidence. the sound of boots on packed snow, the contrails streaked cleanly in
the high sky. weather was very much the point, although i didn't know it at first.

i turned into our street and walked past men bent over shovels in their driveways, breathing vapor.
a  squirrel  moved  along  a  limb  in  a  flowing  motion,  a  passage  so  continuous  it  seemed  to  be  its  own
physical  law,  different  from  the  ones  we've  learned  to  trust.  when  i  was  halfway  down  the  street  i  saw
heinrich crouched on a small ledge outside our attic window. he wore his camouflage jacket and cap, an
outfit with complex meaning for him, at fourteen, struggling to grow and to escape notice simultaneously,
his secrets known to us all. he looked east through binoculars.

i went around back to the kitchen. in the entranceway the washer and dryer were vibrating nicely.
i  could  tell  from  babette's  voice  that  the  person  she  was  talking  to  on  the  phone  was  her  father.  an
impatience  mixed  with  guilt  and  apprehension.  i  stood  behind  her,  put  my  cold  hands  to  her  cheeks.  a
little thing i liked to do. she hung up the phone.












sudden movements."

when  i  got  to  the  attic  he  was  already  back  inside,  standing  by  the  open  window,  still  looking
through the glasses. abandoned possessions were everywhere, oppressive and soul-worrying, creating a
weather of their own among the exposed beams and posts, the fiberglass insulation pads.


rammed and something punched a hole in it. there's a lot of smoke and i don't like the looks of it."
"what does it look like?"


he handed me the binoculars and stepped aside. without climbing onto the ledge i couldn't see
the switching yard and the car or cars in question. but the smoke was plainly visible, a heavy black mass

"why is he on the roof?"
"heinrich? something about the train yards," she said. "it was on the radio."
"shouldn't i get him down?"
"why?"
"he could fall."
"don't tell him that."
"why not?"
"he thinks you underestimate him."
"he's on a ledge," i said. 'there must be something i should be doing."
'the more you show concern, the closer he'll go to the edge."
"i know that but i still have to get him down."
"coax him back in," she said. "be sensitive and caring. get him to talk about himself. don't make

"what happened?"
"the radio said a tank car derailed. but i don't think it derailed from what i could see. i think it got

 51

"did you see fire engines?"
"they're all over the place," he said. "but it looks to me like they're not getting too close. it must be

"it won't come this way."
"how do you know?"
"it just won't. the point is you shouldn't be standing on icy ledges. it worries baba."

"it's called nyodene derivative or nyodene d. it was in a movie we saw in school on toxic wastes.

"what does it cause?"
"the movie wasn't sure what it does to humans. mainly it was rats growing urgent lumps."
"that's what the movie said. what does the radio say?"
"at first they said skin irritation and sweaty palms. but now they say nausea, vomiting, shortness

"the radio calls it a feathery plume," he said. "but it's not a plume."
"what is it?"
"like  a  shapeless  growing  thing.  a  dark  black  breathing  thing  of  smoke.  why  do  they  call  it  a

"air  time  is  valuable.  they  can't  go  into  long  tortured  descriptions.  have  they  said  what  kind  of

hanging in the air beyond the river, more or less shapeless.


pretty toxic or pretty explosive stuff, or both."



"you think if you tell me it worries her, i'll feel guilty and not do it. but if you tell me it worries you, i'll do it
all the time."

"shut the window," i told him.

we went down to the kitchen.  steffie was looking  through the brightly colored  mail for coupons,
lotteries and contests. this was the last day of  the  holiday break  for  the  grade school and  high school.
classes on the hill would resume in a week. i sent heinrich outside to clear snow from the walk. i watched
him stand out there, utterly still, his head turned slightly, a honed awareness in his stance. it took me a
while to realize he was listening to the sirens beyond the river.

an  hour  later  he  was  back  in  the  attic,  this  time  with  a  radio  and  highway  map.  i  climbed  the
narrow stairs, borrowed the glasses and looked again. it was still there, a slightly larger accumulation, a
towering mass in fact, maybe a little blacker now.



plume?"

chemical it is?"

these videotaped rats."




of breath."






blows that way, not this way."








such. any number of reasons that have nothing to do with wind or wind direction."

babette's head appeared at the top of the stairway. she said a neighbor had told her the spill from
the tank car was thirty-five  thousand gallons. people  were being told to stay out of the area.  a feathery
plume hung over the site. she also said the girls were complaining of sweaty palms.


"available for a limited time only with optional megabyte hard disk."
babette's head sank out of sight. i watched heinrich tape the road map to two posts. then i went

down to the kitchen to pay some bills, aware of colored spots whirling atomically somewhere to the right
and behind me.



"what if it blows this way?"
"it won't."
"just this one time."
"it won't. why should it?"
he paused a beat and said in a flat tone, 'they just closed part of the interstate."
"they would want to do that, of course."
"why?"
"they  just  would.  a  sensible  precaution.  a  way  to  facilitate  movement  of  service  vehicles  and

"this is human nausea we're talking about. not rats."
"not rats," he said.
i gave him the binoculars.
"well it won't come this way."
"how do you know?" he said.
"i  just  know.  it's  perfectly  calm  and  still  today.  and  when  there's  a  wind  at  this  time  of  year,  it

"there's been a correction," heinrich told her. 'tell them they ought to be throwing up."
a  helicopter  flew  over,  headed  in  the  direction  of  the  accident.  the  voice  on  the  radio  said:

steffie said, "can you see the feathery plume from the attic window?"
"it's not a plume."



52

"that was the stovers," she said. "they spoke directly with the weather center outside glassboro.

"what are they calling it?"
"a black billowing cloud."
"that's a little more accurate, which means they're coming to grips with the thing. good."
"there's  more,"  she  said.  "it's  expected  that  some  sort  of  air  mass  maybe  moving  down  from

denise walked in, rubbing her hands on her jeans.
"they're using snow-blowers to blow stuff onto the spill," she said.
"what kind of stuff?"
"i  don't  know  but  it's  supposed  to  make  the  spill  harmless,  which  doesn't  explain  what  they're

"but will we have to leave our homes?"

"of course not."

"how do you know?"

"i just know."

"remember how we couldn't go to school?"

'that was inside. this is outside."


we heard police sirens blowing. i watched steffie's lips form the sequence: wow wow wow wow.
she smiled in a certain way when she saw me watching, as though gently startled out of some absent-
minded pleasure.




doing about the actual plume."
"they're keeping it from getting bigger," i said. "when do we eat?"

"i don't know but if it gets any bigger it'll get here with or without a wind."

"it won't get here," i said.

"how do you know?"

"because it won't."


she looked at her palms and went upstairs. the phone rang. babette walked into the kitchen and
picked it up. she looked at me as she listened. i wrote two checks, periodically glancing up to see if she
was still looking at  me.  she seemed to study my  face for the  hidden  meaning of the message she was
receiving. i puckered my lips in a way i knew she disliked.

they're not calling it a feathery plume anymore."




canada."


the billowing cloud is blown due south, it will miss us by a comfortable margin."
"when do we eat?" i said.


we heard sirens again, a different set this time, a larger sound-- not police, fire, ambulance. they
were air-raid sirens, i realized, and they seemed to be blowing in sawyersville, a small community to the
northeast.

steffie washed her hands at the kitchen sink and went upstairs. babette started taking things out
of  the  refrigerator.  i  grabbed  her  by  the  inside  of  the  thigh  as  she  passed  the  table.  she  squirmed
deliciously, a package of frozen corn in her hand.

kids we keep saying nothing's going to happen. we don't want to scare them."


ought to think about it anyway, just in case."

"these things happen to poor people who live in exposed areas. society is set up in such a way
that  it's  the  poor  and  the  uneducated  who  suffer  the  main  impact  of  natural  and  man-made  disasters.
people in low-lying areas get the floods, people in shanties get the hurricanes and tornados. i'm a college
professor.  did  you  ever  see  a  college  professor  rowing  a  boat  down  his  own  street  in  one  of  those  tv
floods? we live in a neat and pleasant town near a college with a quaint name. these things don't happen
in places like blacksmith."

across the table.






"why do you want dinner so early?" she said in a sexy whisper.
"i missed lunch."
"shall i do some chili-fried chicken?"
"first-rate."
"where is wilder?" she said, thick-voiced, as i ran my hands over her breasts, trying with my teeth

"there's always an air mass moving down from canada."
"that's true," she said. 'there's certainly nothing new in that. and since canada is to the north, if

"maybe we ought to be more concerned about the billowing cloud," she said. "it's because of the

"nothing is going to happen."
"i  know  nothing's  going  to  happen,  you  know  nothing's  going  to  happen.  but  at  some  level  we

she was sitting on my lap by now. the checks, bills, contest forms and coupons were scattered

 53

"let's think about the billowing cloud. just a little bit, okay? it could be dangerous."
"everything in tank cars is dangerous. but the effects are mainly long-range and all we have to do

"let's just be sure to keep it in the back of our mind," she said, getting up to smash an ice tray

i  puckered  my  lips  at  her.  then  i  climbed  to  the  attic  one  more  time.  wilder  was  up  there  with

"they're not calling it the feathery plume anymore," he said, not meeting my eyes, as if to spare

"i already knew that."
'"they're calling it the black billowing cloud."
"good."
"why is that good?"
"it  means  they're  looking  the  thing  more  or  less  squarely  in  the  eye.  they're  on  top  of  the

"i don't know. maybe murray stole him."
"i ironed your gown," she said.
"great, great."
"did you pay the phone bill?"
"can't find it."
we were both thick-voiced now. her arms were crossed over my arms in such a way that i could

to undo her bra clip through the blouse.






read the serving suggestions on the box of corn niblets in her left hand.


is stay out of the way."

repeatedly on the rim of the sink, dislodging the cubes in groups of two and three.

heinrich, whose fast glance in my direction contained a certain practiced accusation.

himself the pain of my embarrassment.





situation."

with an air of weary decisiveness, i opened the window, took the binoculars and climbed onto the
ledge. i was wearing a heavy sweater and felt comfortable enough in the cold air but made certain to keep
my  weight  tipped  against  the  building,  with  my  son's  outstretched  hand  clutching  my  belt.  i  sensed  his
support for my little mission, even his hopeful conviction that i might be able to add the balanced weight of
a mature and considered judgment to his pure observations. this is a parent's task, after all.

i  put  the  glasses  to  my  face  and  peered  through  the  gathering  dark.  beneath  the  cloud  of
vaporized  chemicals,  the  scene  was  one  of  urgency  and  operatic  chaos.  floodlights  swept  across  the
switching yard. army helicopters hovered at various points, shining additional lights down on the scene.
colored  lights  from  police  cruisers  crisscrossed  these  wider  beams.  the  tank  car  sat  solidly  on  tracks,
fumes  rising  from  what  appeared  to  be  a  hole  in  one  end.  the  coupling  device  from  a  second  car  had
apparently pierced the tank car. fire engines were deployed at a distance, ambulances and police vans at
a  greater  distance.  i  could  hear  sirens,  voices  calling  through  bullhorns,  a  layer  of  radio  static  causing
small warps in the frosty air. men raced from one vehicle to another, unpacked equipment, carried empty
stretchers.  other  men  in  bright  yellow  mylex  suits  and  respirator  masks  moved  slowly  through  the
luminous  haze,  carrying  death-measuring  instruments.  snow-blowers  sprayed  a  pink  substance  toward
the  tank  car  and  the  surrounding  landscape.  this  thick  mist  arched  through  the  air  like  some  grand
confection at a concert of patriotic music. the snow-blowers were the type used on airport runways, the
police vans were the type to transport riot casualties. smoke drifted from red beams of light into darkness
and then into the breadth of scenic white floods. the men in mylex suits moved with a lunar caution. each
step  was  the  exercise  of  some  anxiety  not  provided  for  by  instinct.  fire  and  explosion  were  not  the
inherent  dangers  here.  this  death  would  penetrate,  seep  into  the  genes,  show  itself  in  bodies  not  yet
born. they moved as if across a swale of moon dust, bulky and wobbling, trapped in the idea of the nature
of time.







fistful of data. come on, tell me what they said on the radio while i was out there."





i crawled back inside with some difficulty.
"what do you think?" he said.
"it's still hanging there. looks rooted to the spot."
"so you're saying you don't think it'll come this way."
"i can tell by your voice that you know something i don't know."
"do you think it'll come this way or not?"
"you want me  to say it won't come this way in a million years. then you'll attack with your little

"it doesn't cause nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, like they said before."
"what does it cause?"
"heart palpitations and a sense of déjà vu."
"déjà vu?"



54

"it affects the false part of the human memory or whatever. that's not all. they're not calling it the

"these things are not important. the important thing is location. it's there, we're here."
"a large air mass is moving down from canada," he said evenly.
"i already knew that."
"that doesn't mean it's not important."
"maybe it is, maybe it isn't. depends."
"the  weather's  about  to  change,"  he  practically  cried  out  to  me  in  a  voice  charged  with  the


black billowing cloud anymore."
"what are they calling it?"

he looked at me carefully.

"the airborne toxic event."

he spoke these words in a clipped and foreboding manner, syllable by syllable, as if he sensed

the threat in state-created terminology. he continued to watch me carefully, searching my face for some
reassurance against the possibility of real danger-- a reassurance he would immediately reject as phony.
a favorite ploy of his.






plaintive throb of his special time of life.

"i'm  not  just  a  college  professor.  i'm  the  head  of  a  department.  i  don't  see  myself  fleeing  an
airborne toxic event. that's  for people who  live in  mobile homes out in  the scrubby parts of  the county,
where the fish hatcheries are."

we  watched  wilder  climb  backwards  down  the  attic  steps,  which  were  higher  than  the  steps
elsewhere  in  the  house.  at  dinner  denise  kept  getting  up  and  walking  in  small  stiff  rapid  strides  to  the
toilet off the hall, a hand clapped to her mouth. we paused in odd moments of chewing or salt-sprinkling
to hear her retch incompletely. heinrich told her she was showing outdated symptoms. she gave him a
slit-eyed  look.  it  was  a  period  of  looks  and  glances,  teeming  interactions,  part  of  the  sensory  array  i
ordinarily  cherish.  heat,  noise,  lights,  looks,  words,  gestures,  personalities,  appliances.  a  colloquial
density that makes family life the one medium of sense knowledge in which an astonishment of heart is
routinely contained.
i watched the girls communicate in hooded looks.

"aren't we eating a little early tonight?" denise said.

"what do you call early?" her mother said.

denise looked at steffie.

"is it because we want to get it out of the way?" she said.

"why do we want to get it out of the way?"

"in case something happens," steffie said.

"what could happen?" babette said.


the girls looked at each other again, a solemn and lingering exchange that indicated some dark
suspicion  was  being  confirmed.  air-raid  sirens  sounded  again,  this  time  so  close  to  us  that  we  were
negatively affected, shaken to the point of avoiding each other's eyes as a way of denying that something
unusual was going on. the sound came from our own red brick firehouse, sirens that hadn't been tested in
a  decade  or  more.  they  made  a  noise  like  some  territorial  squawk  from  out  of  the  mesozoic.  a  parrot
carnivore with a dc-9 wingspan. what a raucousness of brute aggression filled the house, making it seem
as though the walls would fly apart. so close to us, so surely upon us. amazing to think this sonic monster
lay hidden nearby for years.

we went on eating, quietly and neatly, reducing the size of our bites, asking politely for things to
be  passed.  we  became  meticulous  and  terse,  diminished  the  scope  of  our  movements,  buttered  our
bread in the manner of technicians restoring a fresco. still the horrific squawk went on. we continued to
avoid eye contact, were careful not to clink utensils. i believe there passed among us the sheepish hope
that only in this way could we avoid being noticed. it was as though the sirens heralded the presence of
some  controlling  mechanism--a  thing  we  would  do  well  not  to  provoke  with  our  contentiousness  and
spilled food.

it wasn't until a second noise became audible in the pulse of the powerful sirens that we thought
to effect a pause in our little episode of decorous hysteria. heinrich ran to the front door and opened it.
the  night's  combined  sounds  came  washing  in  with  a  freshness  and  renewed  immediacy.  for  the  first
time in minutes we looked at each other, knowing the new sound was an amplified voice but not sure what
it  was  saying.  heinrich  returned,  walking  in  an  over-deliberate  and  stylized  manner,  with  elements  of
stealth. this seemed to mean he was frozen with significance.



"they want us to evacuate," he said, not meeting our eyes.
babette  said,  "did  you  get  the  impression  they  were  only  making  a  suggestion  or  was  it  a  little

 55

we sat there over sponge cake and canned peaches.
"i'm sure there's plenty of time," babette said, "or they would have made a point of telling us to

"it was a fire captain's car with a loudspeaker and it was going pretty fast."
i said, "in other words you didn't have an opportunity to notice the subtle edges of intonation."
"the voice was screaming out."
"due to the sirens," babette said helpfully.
"it  said  something  like,  'evacuate  all  places  of  residence.  cloud  of  deadly  chemicals,  cloud  of

more mandatory, do you think?"





deadly chemicals.'"


hurry. how fast do air masses move, i wonder."

steffie read a coupon for baby lux, crying softly. this brought denise to life. she went upstairs to
pack some things for all of us. heinrich raced two steps at a time to the attic for his binoculars, highway
map and radio. babette went to the pantry and began gathering tins and jars with familiar life enhancing
labels.
steffie helped me clear the table.


twenty minutes later we were in the car. the voice on the radio said that people in the west end
of town were to head for the abandoned boy scout camp, where red cross volunteers would dispense
juice and coffee. people from the east end were to take the parkway to the fourth service area, where they
would proceed  to a restaurant called  the  kung  fu palace, a multiwing building with pagodas, lily ponds
and live deer.

we were among the latecomers in the former group and joined the traffic flow into the main route
out of town, a sordid gantlet of used cars, fast food, discount drugs and quad cinemas. as we waited our
turn  to  edge  onto  the  four-lane  road  we  heard  the  amplified  voice  above  and  behind  us  calling  out  to
darkened homes in a street of sycamores and tall hedges.
"abandon all domiciles, now, now. toxic event, chemical cloud."


the voice grew louder, faded, grew loud again as the vehicle moved in and out of local streets.
toxic  event,  chemical  cloud.  when  the  words  became  faint,  the  cadence  itself  was  still  discernible,  a
recurring sequence in the distance. it seems that danger assigns to public voices the responsibility of a
rhythm, as if in metrical units there is a coherence we can use to balance whatever senseless and furious
event is about to come rushing around our heads.

we made it onto the road as snow began to fall. we had little to say to each other, our minds not
yet adjusted to the actuality of things, the absurd fact of evacuation. mainly we looked at people in other
cars,  trying  to  work  out  from  their  faces  how  frightened  we  should  be.  traffic  moved  at  a  crawl  but  we
thought the pace would pick up some miles down the road where there is a break in the barrier divide that
would  enable  our  westbound  flow  to  utilize  all  four  lanes.  the  two  opposite  lanes  were  empty,  which
meant police had already halted traffic coming this way. an encouraging sign. what people in an exodus
fear most immediately is that those in positions of authority will long since have fled, leaving us in charge
of our own chaos.

the snow came more thickly, the traffic moved in fits and starts. there was a life-style sale at a
home  furnishing  mart.  well-lighted  men  and  women  stood  by  the  huge  window  looking  out  at  us  and
wondering.  it  made us  feel like fools, like tourists doing all the wrong  things.  why were  they content  to
shop  for  furniture  while  we  sat  panicky  in  slowpoke  traffic  in  a  snowstorm?  they  knew  something  we
didn't. in a crisis the true facts are whatever other people say they are. no one's knowledge is less secure
than your own.

air-raid  sirens  were  still  sounding  in  two  or  more  towns.  what  could  those  shoppers  know  that
would  make  them  remain  behind  while  a  more  or  less  clear  path  to  safety  lay  before  us  all?  i  started
pushing  buttons  on  the  radio.  on  a  glassboro  station  we  learned  there  was  new  and  important
information. people already indoors were being asked to stay indoors. we were left to guess the meaning
of this. were the roads impossibly jammed? was it snowing nyodene d.?

i kept punching buttons, hoping to find someone with background information. a woman identified
as a consumer affairs editor began a discussion of the medical problems that could result from personal
contact  with  the  airborne  toxic  event.  babette  and  i  exchanged  a  wary  glance.  she  immediately  began
talking  to  the girls while i  turned the volume down to  keep them  from  learning what they might imagine
was in store for them.
"convulsions, coma, miscarriage," said the well-informed and sprightly voice.


we passed a three-story motel. every room was lighted, every window filled with people staring
out at us. we were a parade of fools, open not only to the effects of chemical fallout but to the scornful
judgment of other people. why weren't they out here, sitting in heavy coats behind windshield wipers in



56

the silent snow? it seemed imperative that we get to the boy scout camp, scramble into the main building,
seal the doors, huddle on camp beds with our juice and coffee, wait for the all-clear.

cars began to mount the grassy incline at the edge of the road, creating a third lane of severely
tilted traffic. situated in what had formerly been the righthand lane, we didn't have any choice but to watch
these cars pass us at a slightly higher elevation and with a rakish thrust, deviated from the horizontal.
slowly we approached an overpass, seeing people on foot up  there. they carried boxes and suitcases,
objects in blankets, a long line  of people leaning  into  the blowing snow.  people cradling pets and small
children, an old man wearing a blanket over his pajamas, two women shouldering a rolled-up rug. there
were people  on bicycles, children being pulled on sleds and in wagons.  people with supermarket carts,
people  clad  in  every  kind  of  bulky  outfit,  peering  out  from  deep  hoods.  there  was  a  family  wrapped
completely in plastic, a single large sheet of transparent polyethylene. they walked beneath their shield in
lock step, the man and woman each at one end, three kids between, all of them secondarily wrapped in
shimmering  rainwear.  the  whole  affair  had  about  it  a  well-rehearsed  and  self-satisfied  look,  as  though
they'd been waiting for months to strut their stuff. people kept appearing from behind a high rampart and
trudging across the overpass, shoulders dusted with snow, hundreds of people moving with a kind of fated
determination. a new round of sirens started up. the trudging people did not quicken their pace, did not
look down at us or into the night sky for some sign of the wind-driven cloud. they just kept moving across
the  bridge  through  patches  of  snow-raging  light.  out  in  the  open,  keeping  their  children  near,  carrying
what they could, they seemed to be part of some ancient destiny, connected in doom and ruin to a whole
history of people trekking across wasted landscapes. there was an epic quality about them that made me
wonder for the first time at the scope of our predicament.
the radio said: "it's the rainbow hologram that gives this credit card a marketing intrigue."


we moved slowly beneath the overpass,  hearing a flurry of automobile  horns and  the  imploring
wail of an ambulance stuck in traffic. fifty yards ahead the traffic narrowed to one lane and we soon saw
why. one of the cars had skidded off the incline and barreled into a vehicle in our lane. horns quacked up
and down the line. a helicopter sat just above us, shining a white beam down on the mass of collapsed
metal. people sat dazed on the grass, being tended to by a pair of bearded paramedics. two people were
bloody. there was blood on a smashed window. blood soaked upward through newly fallen snow. drops
of  blood  speckled  a  tan  handbag.  the  scene  of  injured  people,  medics,  smoking  steel,  all  washed  in  a
strong  and  eerie  light,  took  on  the  eloquence  of  a  formal  composition.  we  passed  silently  by,  feeling
curiously reverent, even uplifted by the sight of the heaped cars and fallen people.

heinrich kept watching through the rear window, taking up his binoculars as the scene dwindled in
the  distance.  he  described  for  us  in  detail  the  number  and  placement  of  bodies,  the  skid  marks,  the
vehicular damage. when the wreck was no longer visible, he talked about everything that had happened
since the air-raid siren at dinner. he spoke enthusiastically, with a sense of appreciation for the vivid and
unexpected.  i  thought  we'd  all  occupied  the  same  mental  state,  subdued,  worried,  confused.  it  hadn't
occurred tome that one of us might find these events brilliantly stimulating. i looked at him in the rearview
mirror.  he  sat  slouched  in  the  camouflage  jacket  with  velcro  closures,  steeped  happily  in  disaster.  he
talked  about  the  snow,  the  traffic,  the  trudging  people.  he  speculated  on  how  far  we  were  from  the
abandoned camp, what sort of primitive accommodations might be available there. i'd never heard him go
on  about  something  with  such  spirited  enjoyment.  he  was  practically  giddy.  he  must  have  known  we
could all die. was this some kind of end-of-the-world elation? did he seek distraction from his own small
miseries in some violent and overwhelming event? his voice betrayed a craving for terrible things.




watched her carefully. she looked straight ahead.

as she seemed to swallow whatever it was she'd put in her mouth.







amateurish bluff.

"what's that?" i said.
"drive the car, jack."
"i saw your throat contract. you swallowed something."
"just a life saver. drive the car please."
"you place a life saver in your mouth and you swallow it without an interval of sucking?"
"swallow what? it's still in my mouth."
she thrust her face toward me, using her tongue to make a small lump in her cheek. a clear-cut

"is this a mild winter or a harsh winter?" steffie said.
"compared to what?" denise said.
"i don't know."
i thought i saw babette slip something into her mouth. i took my eye off the road for a moment,

i pretended to return my attention to the road but quickly turned once more, catching her off guard

 57

denise said, "did they ever think about what happens to the dogs when they get close enough to

"but you swallowed something. i saw."

"that was just saliva that i didn't know what to do with. drive the car, would you?"


i sensed that denise was getting interested and decided not to pursue the matter. this was not
the  time  to  be  questioning  her  mother  about  medications,  side  effects  and  so  on.  wilder  was  asleep,
leaning into babette's arm. the windshield wipers made sweaty arcs. from the radio we learned that dogs
trained to sniff out nyodene d. were being sent to the area from a chemical detection center in a remote
part of new mexico.

this stuff to smell it?"
"nothing happens to the dogs," babette said.

"how do you know?"

"because it only affects humans and rats."

"i don't believe you."

"ask jack."

"ask heinrich," i said.


"it could be true," he said, clearly lying. "they use rats to test for things that humans can catch, so
it means we get the same diseases, rats and humans. besides, they wouldn't use dogs if they thought it
could hurt them."
"why not?"

"a dog is a mammal."

"so's a rat," denise said.

"a rat is a vermin," babette said.

"mostly what a rat is," heinrich said, "is a rodent."

"it's also a vermin."

"a cockroach is a vermin," steffie said.

"a cockroach is an insect. you count the legs is how you know."

"it's also a vermin."

"does a cockroach get cancer? no," denise said. "that  must mean a rat is  more  like a human

than it is  like  a cockroach, even if  they're  both vermins, since a rat and  a human can get cancer but a
cockroach can't."

common than two things that are only vermins."

mammal too?"
snow turned to sleet, sleet to rain.


we reached the point where the concrete barrier gives way to a twenty-yard stretch of landscaped
median no higher than a curbstone. but instead of a state trooper directing traffic into two extra lanes, we
saw a mylex-suited man waving us away from the opening. just beyond him was the scrap-metal burial
mound  of  a  winnebago  and  a  snowplow.  the  huge  and  tortured  wreck  emitted  a  wisp  of  rusty  smoke.
brightly colored plastic utensils were scattered for some distance. there was no sign of victims or fresh
blood, leading us to believe that some time had passed since the recreational vehicle mounted the plow,
probably in a moment when opportunism seemed an easily defensible failing, given the situation. it must
have been the blinding snow  that caused the driver to leap the  median without noting an  object on the
other side.
"i saw all this before," steffie said.

"what do you mean?" i said.


"this  happened  once  before.  just  like  this.  the  man  in  the  yellow  suit  and  gas  mask.  the  big
wreck sitting in the snow. it was totally and exactly like this. we were all here in the car. rain made little
holes in the snow. everything."

it  was  heinrich  who'd  told  me  that  exposure  to  the  chemical  waste  could  cause  a  person  to
experience a sense of déjà vu.  steffie  wasn't  there when he said  it, but she could  have heard  it on the
kitchen  radio,  where  she  and  denise  had  probably  learned  about  sweaty  palms  and  vomiting  before
developing these symptoms themselves. i didn't think steffie knew what déjà vu meant, but it was possible
babette had told her. déjà vu, however, was no longer a working symptom of nyodene contamination. it
had been preempted by coma, convulsions, and miscarriage. if steffie had learned about déjà vu on the
radio but then missed the subsequent upgrading to more deadly conditions, it could mean she was in a
position  to  be  tricked  by  her  own  apparatus  of  suggestibility.  she  and  denise  had  been  lagging  all
evening.  they  were  late  with  sweaty  palms,  late  with  nausea,  late  again  with  déjà  vu.  what  did  it  all

"in  other  words,"  heinrich  said,  "she's  saying  that  two  things  that  are  mammals  have  more  in

"are  you  people  telling  me,"  babette  said,  "that  a  rat  is  not  only  a  vermin  and  a  rodent  but  a



58

mean? did steffie truly imagine she'd seen the wreck before or did she only imagine she'd imagined it? is
it possible to have a false perception of an illusion? is there a true déjà vu and a false déjà vu? i wondered
whether her palms had been truly sweaty or whether she'd simply imagined a sense of wetness. and was
she so open to suggestion that she would develop every symptom as it was announced?
i feel sad for people and the queer part we play in our own disasters.

but what if she hadn't heard the radio, didn't know what déjà vu was? what if she was developing

real  symptoms  by  natural  means?  maybe  the  scientists  were  right  in  the  first  place,  with  their  original
announcements, before they revised upward. which was worse, the real condition or the self-created one,
and did it matter? i wondered about these and allied questions. as i drove i found myself giving and taking
an  oral  examination  based  on  the  kind  of  quibbling  fine-points  that  had  entertained  several  centuries'
worth of medieval idlers. could a nine-year-old girl suffer a miscarriage due to the power of suggestion?
would she have to be pregnant first? could the power of suggestion be strong enough to work backward
in  this  manner,  from  miscarriage  to  pregnancy  to  menstruation  to  ovulation?  which  comes  first,
menstruation or ovulation?  are we talking  about  mere symptoms or deeply entrenched conditions?  is a
symptom a sign or a thing? what is a thing and how do we know it's not another thing?

i  turned  off  the  radio,  not  to  help  me  think  but  to  keep  me  from  thinking.  vehicles  lurched  and
skidded. someone threw a gum wrapper out a side window and babette made an indignant speech about
inconsiderate people littering the highways and countryside.
"i'll tell you something else that's happened before," heinrich said. "we're running out of gas."

the dial quivered on e.

"there's always extra," babette said.

"how can there be always extra?"

"that's the way the tank is constructed. so you don't run out."

"there can't be always extra. if you keep going, you run out."

"you don't keep going forever."

"how do you know when to stop?" he said.


"when you pass a gas station," i told him, and there it was, a deserted and rain-swept plaza with
proud pumps standing  beneath an array of  multicolored banners.  i  drove in, jumped out of  the car, ran
around to the pumps with my head tucked under the raised collar of my coat. they were not locked, which
meant the attendants had fled suddenly, leaving things intriguingly as they were, like the tools and pottery
of some pueblo civilization,  bread in  the  oven,  table set for three, a  mystery  to haunt  the generations. i
seized the hose on the unleaded pump. the banners smacked in the wind.

a few minutes later, back on the road, we saw a remarkable and startling sight. it appeared in the
sky ahead of us and to the left, prompting us to lower ourselves in our seats, bend our heads for a clearer
view,  exclaim  to each other in  half  finished phrases.  it was the black billowing cloud, the airborne  toxic
event, lighted by the clear beams of seven army helicopters. they were tracking its windborne movement,
keeping it in view. in every car, heads shifted, drivers blew their horns to alert others, faces appeared in
side windows, expressions set in tones of outlandish wonderment.

the  enormous  dark  mass  moved  like  some  death  ship  in  a  norse  legend,  escorted  across  the
night by armored creatures with spiral wings. we weren't sure how to react. it was a terrible thing to see,
so close, so low, packed with chlorides, benzenes, phenols, hydrocarbons, or whatever the precise toxic
content. but it was also spectacular, part of the grandness of a sweeping event, like the vivid scene in the
switching yard or the people trudging across the snowy overpass with children, food, belongings, a tragic
army of the dispossessed. our fear was accompanied by a sense of awe that bordered on the religious. it
is surely possible to be awed by the thing that  threatens your life, to see  it as a cosmic force, so much
larger than yourself, more powerful, created by elemental and willful rhythms. this was a death made in
the laboratory, defined and measurable, but we thought of it at the time in a simple and primitive way, as
some  seasonal  perversity  of  the  earth  like  a  flood  or  tornado,  something  not  subject  to  control.  our
helplessness did not seem compatible with the idea of a man-made event.
in the back seat the kids fought for possession of the binoculars.


the whole thing was amazing. they seemed to be spotlighting the cloud for us as if it were part of
a sound-and-light show, a bit of mood-setting mist drifting across a high battlement where a king had been
slain.  but  this  was  not  history  we  were  witnessing.  it  was  some  secret  festering  thing,  some  dreamed
emotion that accompanies the dreamer out of sleep. flares came swooning from the helicopters, creamy
bursts  of  red  and  white  light.  drivers  sounded  their  horns  and  children  crowded  all  the  windows,  faces
tilted, pink hands pressed against the glass.

the  road  curved  away  from  the  toxic  cloud  and  traffic  moved  more  freely  for  a  while.  at  an
intersection near the boy scout camp, two school buses entered the mainstream traffic, both carrying the

 59

remarks existed in a state of permanent flotation. no one thing was either more or less plausible

insane  of  blacksmith.  we  recognized  the  drivers,  spotted  familiar  faces  in  the  windows,  people  we
customarily saw sitting  on lawn chairs  behind the asylum's sparse hedges  or walking in ever narrowing
circles, with ever increasing speed, like spinning masses in a gyration device. we felt an odd affection for
them  and  a  sense  of  relief  that  they  were  being  looked  after  in  a  diligent  and  professional  manner.  it
seemed to mean the structure was intact.
we passed a sign for the most photographed barn in america.


it took an hour to funnel traffic into the single-lane approach to the camp. mylex-suited men waved
flashlights  and  set  out  day-glo  pylons,  directing  us  toward  the  parking  lot  and  onto  athletic  fields  and
other open areas. people came out of the woods, some wearing headlamps, some carrying shopping
bags, children, pets. we bumped along dirt paths, over ruts and mounds. near the main buildings we saw
a group of  men and women carrying clipboards and walkie-talkies, non-mylex-suited officials, experts in
the new science of evacuation. steffie joined wilder in fitful sleep. the rain let up. people turned off their
headlights,  sat  uncertainly  in  their  cars.  the  long  strange  journey  was  over.  we  waited  for  a  sense  of
satisfaction  to  reach  us,  some  mood  in  the  air  of  quiet  accomplishment,  the  well-earned  fatigue  that
promises a still and deep-lying sleep. but people sat in their dark cars staring out at each other through
closed  windows.  heinrich  ate  a  candy  bar.  we  listened  to  the  sound  of  his  teeth  getting  stuck  in  the
caramel and glucose mass. finally a family of five got out of a datsun maxima. they wore life jackets and
carried flares.


small crowds collected around certain men. here were the sources of information and rumor. one
person worked in a chemical plant, another  had overheard a remark, a  third  was related  to a clerk in a
state agency. true, false and other kinds of news radiated through the dormitory from these dense
clusters.

it was said that we would be allowed to go home first thing in the morning; that the government
was engaged in a cover-up; that a helicopter had entered the toxic cloud and never reappeared; that the
dogs had arrived  from new  mexico, parachuting into  a meadow in a  daring  night drop; that  the  town of
farmington would be uninhabitable for forty years.

than any other thing. as people jolted out of reality, we were released from the need to distinguish.

some  families  chose  to  sleep  in  their  cars,  others  were  forced  to  do  so  because  there  was  no
room for them in the seven or eight buildings on the grounds. we were in a large barracks, one of three
such  buildings  at  the  camp,  and  with  the  generator  now  working  we  were  fairly  comfortable.  the  red
cross  had  provided  cots,  portable  heaters,  sandwiches  and  coffee.  there  were  kerosene  lamps  to
supplement  the  existing  overhead  lights.  many  people  had  radios,  extra  food  to  share  with  others,
blankets, beach chairs, extra clothing. the place was crowded, still quite cold, but the sight of nurses and
volunteer workers made us feel the children were safe, and the presence of other stranded souls, young
women with infants, old and infirm people, gave us a certain staunchness and will, a selfless bent that was
pronounced  enough  to  function  as  a  common  identity.  this  large  gray  area,  dank  and  bare  and  lost  to
history just  a couple of  hours ago, was an oddly agreeable  place right now,  filled  with an eagerness of
community and voice.
seekers  of  news  moved  from  one  cluster  of  people  to  another,  tending  to  linger  at  the  larger

groups. in this way i moved slowly through the barracks. there were nine evacuation centers, i learned,
including this one and the kung fu palace. iron city had not been emptied out; nor had most of the other
towns in the area. it was said that the governor was on his way from the capitol in an executive helicopter.
it  would  probably  set  down  in  a  bean  field  outside  a  deserted  town,  allowing  the  governor  to  emerge,
square-jawed  and  confident,  in  a  bush  jacket,  within  camera  range,  for  ten  or  fifteen  seconds,  as  a
demonstration of his imperishability.

what a surprise it was to ease my way between people at the outer edges of one of the largest
clusters and discover that my own son was at the center of things, speaking in his new-found voice, his
tone of enthusiasm for runaway calamity. he was talking about the airborne toxic event in a technical way,
although  his  voice  all  but  sang  with  prophetic  disclosure.  he  pronounced  the  name  itself,  nyodene
derivative, with an unseemly relish, taking morbid delight in the very sound. people listened attentively to
this adolescent boy in a field jacket and cap, with binoculars strapped around his neck and an instamatic
fastened to his belt. no doubt his listeners were influenced by his age. he would be truthful and earnest,
serving no special interest; he would have an awareness of the environment; his knowledge of chemistry
would be fresh and up-to-date.

i heard him say, "the stuff they sprayed on the big spill at the train yard was probably soda ash.
but it was a case of too little too late. my guess is they'll get some crop dusters up in the air at daybreak



60

he arched his brows and began to twitch comically, his tongue lolling in a corner of his mouth. i

and bombard the toxic cloud with lots more soda ash, which could break it up and scatter it into a million
harmless puffs. soda ash is the common name for sodium carbonate, which is used in the manufacture of
glass, ceramics, detergents and soaps. it's also what they use to make bicarbonate of soda, something a
lot of you have probably guzzled after a night on the town."

people  moved in closer, impressed by  the  boy's knowledgeability and wit.  it was remarkable  to
hear him speak so easily to a crowd of strangers. was he finding himself, learning how to determine his
worth from the reactions of others? was it possible that out of the turmoil and surge of this dreadful event
he would learn to make his way in the world?

"what you're probably all wondering is what exactly is this nyodene d. we keep hearing about? a
good question. we studied it in school, we saw movies of rats having convulsions and so on. so, okay, it's
basically  simple.  nyodene  d.  is  a  whole  bunch  of  things  thrown  together  that  are  byproducts  of  the
manufacture of insecticide. the original stuff kills roaches, the byproducts kill everything left over. a little
joke our teacher made."
he snapped his fingers, let his left leg swing a bit.

"in powder form it's colorless, odorless and very dangerous, except no one seems to know exactly

what it causes in humans or in the offspring of humans. they tested for years and either they don't know
for sure or they know and aren't saying. some things are too awful to publicize."

was astonished to hear people laugh.

"once it seeps into  the soil,  it has a  life span of forty years. this is longer than a lot of people.
after  five  years  you'll  notice  various  kinds  of  fungi  appearing  between  your  regular  windows  and  storm
windows as well as in your clothes and food. after ten years your screens will turn rusty and begin to pit
and  rot.  siding  will  warp.  there  will  be  glass  breakage  and  trauma  to  pets.  after  twenty  years  you'll
probably have to seal yourself in the attic and just wait and see. i guess there's a lesson in all this. get to
know your chemicals."

i didn't want him to see me there. it would make him self-conscious, remind him of his former life
as a gloomy and fugitive boy. let him bloom, if that's what he was doing, in the name of mischance, dread
and  random  disaster.  so  i  slipped  away,  passing  a  man  who  wore  snow  boots  wrapped  in  plastic,  and
headed for the far end of the barracks, where we'd, earlier made camp.

we  were  next  to  a  black  family  of  jehovah's  witnesses.  a  man  and  woman  with  a  boy  about
twelve. father and son were handing but tracts to people nearby and seemed to have no trouble finding
willing recipients and listeners.
the woman said to babette, "isn't this something?"

"nothing surprises me anymore," babette said.

"isn't that the truth."

"what would surprise me would be if there were no surprises."

"that sounds about right."

"or if there were little bitty surprises. that would be a surprise. instead of things like this."

"god jehovah's got a bigger surprise in store than this," the woman said.

"god jehovah?"

"that's the one."


steffie and wilder were asleep in one of  the cots. denise sat at the other end engrossed in the
physicians' desk reference. several air mattresses were stacked against the wall. there was a long line
at the emergency telephone, people calling relatives or trying to reach the switchboard at one or another
radio call-in show.  the radios here were tuned  mainly to just such shows. babette sat in  a camp chair,
going through a canvas bag full of snack thins and other provisions.  i noticed jars and cartons  that had
been sitting in the refrigerator or cabinet for months.




of other people as an opportunity to cut down on fatty foods."
"you  take  discipline  where  you  can  find  it,"  she  said.  "if  i  don't  eat  my  yogurt  now,  i  may  as  well  stop
buying the stuff forever. except i think i'll skip the wheat germ."

closely.



"i thought this would be a good time to cut down on fatty things," she said.
"why now especially?"
"this is a time for discipline, mental toughness. we're practically at the edge."
"i think it's interesting that you regard a possible disaster for yourself, your family and thousands

the brand name was foreign-looking. i picked up the jar of wheat germ and examined the label

"it's german," i told her. "eat it."
there  were  people  in  pajamas  and  slippers.  a  man  with  a  rifle  slung  over  his  shoulder.  kids

 61

"let's  keep  the  radio  turned  off,"  she  whispered.  "so  the  girls  can't  hear.  they  haven't  gotten

"heinrich seems to be coming out of his shell," i whispered.
"where is he? i haven't seen him."
"see that knot of people? he's right in the middle. he's telling them what he knows about the toxic

"what if the symptoms are real?"
"how could they be real?"
"why couldn't they be real?"
"they get them only when they're broadcast," she whispered.
"did steffie hear about déjà vu on the radio?"
"she must have."
"how do you know? were you with her when it was broadcast?"
"i'm not sure."
"think hard."
"i can't remember."
"do you remember telling her what déjà vu means?"
she spooned some yogurt out of the carton, seemed to pause, deep in thought.
"this happened before," she said finally.
"what happened before?"
"eating yogurt, sitting here, talking about déjà vu."
"i don't want to hear this."
"the yogurt was on my spoon. i saw it in a flash. the whole experience. natural, whole-milk, low-

crawling into sleeping bags. babette gestured, wanting me to lean closer.

beyond déjà vu. i want to keep it that way."

















fat."

the yogurt was still on the spoon. i watched her put the spoon to her mouth, thoughtfully, trying to
measure the action against the illusion of a matching original. from my squatting position i motioned her
to lean closer.



event."
"what does he know?"

"quite a lot, it turns out."


"why didn't he tell us?" she whispered. "he's probably tired of us. he doesn't think it's worth his
while to be funny and charming in front of his family.  that's  the way sons are. we represent the wrong
kind of challenge."
"funny and charming?"


"i guess he had it in him all  the while.  it was a question of finding the right  time to exercise his
gifts." she moved closer, our heads almost touching.  "don't you think you ought to go over  there?" she
said. "let him see you in the crowd. show him that his father is present at his big moment."
"he'll only get upset if he sees me in the crowd."

"why?"

"i'm his father."

"so if you go over there, you'll ruin things by embarrassing him and cramping his style because of

the father-son thing. and if you don't go over, he'll never know you saw him in his big moment and he'll
think he has to behave in your presence the way he's always behaved, sort of peevishly and defensive,
instead of in this new, delightful and expansive manner."





little skirmishes between blood relatives?"









"it's a double bind."
"what if i went over?" she whispered. "he'll think i sent you."
"would that be so awful?"
"he thinks i use you to get him to do what i want."
"there may be some truth in that, jack. but then what are stepparents for if they can't be used in

i moved still closer, lowered my voice even more. "just a life saver," i said. "what?"
"just some saliva that you didn't know what to do with."
"it was a life saver," she whispered, making an 0 with her thumb and index finger.
"give me one."
"it was the last one."
"what flavor-- quick."
"cherry."
i puckered my lips and made little sucking sounds. the black man with the tracts came over and



62

"are these great days?" he said.
i studied his face, trying to find a clue to the right answer. "do you feel it coming? is it on the way?

he bounced on his toes as he spoke.
"wars,  famines,  earthquakes,  volcanic  eruptions.  it's  all  beginning  to  jell.  in  your  own  words,  is

"no."
"you said it, i didn't. floods, tornados, epidemics of strange new diseases. is it a sign? is it the

"one million."
"i  didn't  say  it,  you  did.  one  million  soldiers  and  they  can't  stop  it.  do  you  know  who's  got  the

"it's either china or russia, although the vietnamese ought to be mentioned."
"tell me this," he said. "can the vietnamese stop it?"
"no."
"it's here, isn't it? people feel it. we know in our bones. god's kingdom is coming."
he was a rangy man with sparse hair and a gap between his two front teeth. he squatted easily,

squatted next to me. we engaged in an earnest and prolonged handshake. he studied me openly, giving
the impression that he had traveled this rugged distance, uprooting his family, not to escape the chemical
event but to find the one person who would understand what he had to say.
"it's happening everywhere, isn't it?"

"more or less," i said.

"and what's the government doing about it?"

"nothing."


"you said it, i didn't. there's only one word in the language to describe what's being done and you
found it exactly. i'm not surprised at all. but when you think about it, what can they do? because what is
coming is definitely coming. no government in the world is big enough to stop it. does a man like yourself
know the size of india's standing army?"


biggest standing army in the world?"





seemed loose-jointed and comfortable. i realized he was wearing a suit and tie with running shoes.


do you want it to come?


there anything that can stop it from coming once it picks up momentum?"


truth? are you ready?"

"do people really feel it in their bones?" i said.

"good news travels fast."

"do people talk about it? on your door-to-door visits, do you get the impression they want it?"

"it's not do they want it. it's where do i go to sign up. it's get me out of here right now. people ask,
'is there seasonal change in god's kingdom?' they ask, 'are there bridge tolls and returnable bottles?' in
other words i'm saying they're getting right down to it."




maybe it was prissy to be quoting statistics in the face of powerful beliefs, fears, desires.

coming up.
"we all get one?"


"you're either among the wicked or among the saved. the wicked get to rot as they walk down the
street. they get to feel their own eyes slide out of their sockets. you'll know them by their stickiness and
lost parts. people  tracking slime of their own making.  all  the flashiness of armageddon is in the rotting.
the saved know each other by their neatness and reserve. he doesn't have showy ways is how you know
a saved person."

he  was  a  serious  man,  he  was  matter-of-fact  and  practical,  down  to  his  running  shoes.  i
wondered about his eerie self-assurance, his  freedom from doubt. is  this  the  point of  armageddon? no
ambiguity, no more doubt. he was ready to run into the next world. he was forcing the next world to seep
into  my  consciousness,  stupendous  events  that  seemed  matter-of-fact  to  him,  self-evident,  reasonable,
imminent, true. i did not feel armageddon in my bones but i worried about all those people who did, who
were  ready  for  it,  wishing  hard,  making  phone  calls  and  bank  withdrawals.  if  enough  people  want  it  to
happen, will it happen? how many people are enough people? why are we talking to each other from this
aboriginal crouch?

he  handed  me  a  pamphlet  called  "twenty  common  mistakes  about  the  end  of  the  world."  i
struggled out of  the squatting posture, feeling dizziness and back-pain. at the front of the hall a woman

"you feel it's a ground swell."
"a sudden gathering. exactly put. i took one look and i knew. this is a man who understands."
"earthquakes are not up, statistically."
he  gave  me  a  condescending  smile.  i  felt  it  was  richly  deserved,  although  i  wasn't  sure  why.

"how do you plan to spend your resurrection?" he said, as though asking about a long weekend

 63

"you're saying when i got out of the car, the cloud may have been close enough to rain all over

"it's not your  fault," she said impatiently, "but you were practically right in it for about two and a

"what's wrong?" i said to her.
"didn't you hear what the voice said?"
"exposure."
"that's right," she said sharply.
"what's that got to do with us?"
"not us," she said. "you."
"why me?"
"aren't you the one who got out of the car to fill the gas tank?"
"where was the airborne event when i did that?"
"just ahead of us. don't you remember? you got back in the car and we went a little ways and

was  saying  something  about  exposure  to  toxic  agents.  her  small  voice  was  almost  lost  in  the  shuffling
roar of  the barracks,  the kind  of  low-level rumble that humans routinely make in large enclosed places.
denise had put down her reference work and was giving me a hard-eyed look. it was the look she usually
saved for her father and his latest loss of foothold.










then there it was in all those lights."

me."

half minutes."

i made my way up front. two lines were forming. a to m and n to z. at the end of each line was a
folding table with a microcomputer on it. technicians milled about, men and women with lapel badges and
color-coded armbands. i stood behind the life-jacket-wearing family. they looked bright, happy and well-
drilled. the thick orange vests did not seem especially out of place even though we were on more or less
dry land, well above sea level, many miles from the nearest ominous body of water. stark upheavals bring
out  every  sort  of  quaint  aberration  by  the  very  suddenness  of  their  coming.  dashes  of  color  and
idiosyncrasy marked the scene from beginning to end.

the lines were not long. when i reached the a-to-m desk, the man seated there typed out data on
his keyboard. my name, age, medical history, so on. he was a gaunt young man who seemed suspicious
of conversation that strayed outside certain unspecified guidelines. over the left sleeve on his khaki jacket
he wore a green armband bearing the word simuvac.
i related the circumstances of my presumed exposure.

"how long were you out there?"

"two and a half minutes," i said. "is that considered long or short?"

"anything that puts you in contact with actual emissions means we have a situation."

"why didn't the drifting cloud disperse in all that wind and rain?"


"this  is  not  your  everyday  cirrus.  this  is  a  high-definition  event.  it  is  packed  with  dense
concentrations  of  byproduct.  you  could  almost  toss  a  hook  in  there  and  tow  it  out  to  sea,  which  i'm
exaggerating to make a point."
"what about people in the car? i had to open the door to get out and get back in."


"there are known degrees of exposure. i'd say their situation is they're minimal risks. it's the two
and  a  half  minutes  standing  right  in  it  that  makes  me  wince.  actual  skin  and  orifice  contact.  this  is
nyodene  d.  a  whole  new  generation  of  toxic  waste.  what  we  call  state  of  the  art.  one  part  per  million
million can send a rat into a permanent state."

he regarded me with the grimly superior air of a combat veteran. obviously he didn't think much
of people whose complacent and overprotected lives did not allow for encounters with brain-dead rats. i
wanted this man on my side. he had access to data. i was prepared to be servile and fawning if it would
keep  him  from  dropping  casually  shattering  remarks  about  my  degree  of  exposure  and  chances  for
survival.





the simulation?"
"we took it right into the streets."

"how is it going?" i said.


"the insertion curve isn't as smooth as we would like. there's a probability excess. plus which we
don't have our victims laid out where we'd want them if this was an actual simulation. in other words we're

"that's quite an armband you've got there. what does simuvac mean? sounds important."
"short for simulated evacuation. a new state program they're still battling over funds for."
"but this evacuation isn't simulated. it's real."
"we know that. but we thought we could use it as a model."
"a form of practice? are you saying you saw a chance to use the real event in order to rehearse



64

"what  about  the  computers?  is  that  real  data  you're  running  through  the  system  or  is  it  just

he had a skinny neck and jug-handle ears to go with his starved skull--the innocent prewar look of

"what will we know in fifteen years?"
"if you're still alive at the time, we'll know that much more than we do now. nyodene d. has a life

"you're generating big numbers," he said, peering at the screen.
"i was out there only two and a half minutes. that's how many seconds?"
"it's not just you were out there so many seconds. it's your whole data profile. i tapped into your

forced  to  take  our  victims  as  we  find  them.  we  didn't  get  a  jump  on  computer  traffic.  suddenly  it  just
spilled  out,  three-dimensionally,  all  over  the  landscape.  you  have  to  make  allowances  for  the  fact  that
everything we see tonight is real. there's a lot of polishing we still have to do. but that's what this exercise
is all about."

practice stuff?"
"you watch," he said.


he spent a  fair amount of  time  tapping on the keys and then studying coded responses on the
data  screen--a  considerably  longer  time,  it  seemed  to  me,  than  he'd  devoted  to  the  people  who'd
preceded me  in line. in fact i began to  feel  that others were watching  me. i stood with my arms folded,
trying to create a picture of an impassive man, someone in line at a hardware store waiting for the girl at
the register to ring up his heavy-duty rope. it seemed the only way to neutralize events, to counteract the
passage of computerized dots that registered my life and death. look at no one, reveal nothing, remain
still. the genius of the primitive mind is that it can render human helplessness in noble and beautiful ways.



history. i'm getting bracketed numbers with pulsing stars."
"what does that mean?"

"you'd rather not know."


he made a silencing gesture as if something of particular morbid interest was appearing on the
screen.  i  wondered  what  he  meant  when  he  said  he'd  tapped  into  my  history.  where  was  it  located
exactly? some state or federal agency, some insurance company or credit firm or medical clearinghouse?
what history was he referring to? i'd told him some basic things. height, weight, childhood diseases. what
else did he know? did he know about my wives, my involvement with hitler, my dreams and fears?

a rural murderer.






meantime we definitely have a situation."


span of thirty years. you'll have made it halfway through."





anything."

radius of the airborne event."


of the barracks. to look at him would be to declare my vulnerability.

married, settle down, have kids. there's no reason you can't do these things, knowing what we know."
"but you said we have a situation."


"i didn't say it. the computer did. the whole system says it. it's what we call a massive data-base
tally.  gladney, j.  a.  k. i punch in  the name,  the substance, the exposure  time and  then i tap into your
computer  history.  your  genetics,  your  personals,  your  medicals,  your  psychologicals,  your  police-and-
hospitals. it comes back pulsing stars. this doesn't mean anything is going to happen to you as such, at
least not today or tomorrow. it just means you are the sum total of your data. no man escapes that."

real."

"am i going to die?"
"not as such," he said.
"what do you mean?"
"not in so many words."
"how many words does it take?"
"it's  not  a  question  of  words.  it's  a  question  of  years.  we'll  know  more  in  fifteen  years.  in  the

"i thought it was forty years."
"forty years in the soil. thirty years in the human body."
"so, to outlive this substance, i will have to make it into my eighties. then i can begin to relax."
"knowing what we know at this time."
"but  the  general  consensus  seems  to  be  that  we  don't  know  enough  at  this  time  to  be  sure  of

"let me answer like so. if i was a rat i wouldn't want to be anywhere within a two hundred mile

"what if you were a human?"
he looked at me carefully. i stood with my arms folded, staring over his head toward the front door

"i  wouldn't  worry  about  what  i  can't  see  or  feel,"  he  said.  "i'd  go  ahead  and  live  my  life.  get

"and  this  massive  so-called  tally  is  not  a  simulation  despite  that  armband  you're  wearing.  it  is

 65

she reported a front-page story. "life after death guaranteed with bonus coupons." then turned

"it is real," he said.

i  stood  absolutely  still.  if  they  thought  i  was  already  dead,  they  might  be  inclined  to  leave  me

alone. i think i felt as i would if a doctor had held an x-ray to the light showing a star-shaped hole at the
center of one of my vital organs. death has entered. it is inside you. you are said to be dying and yet are
separate from the dying, can ponder it at your leisure, literally see on the x-ray photograph or computer
screen the horrible alien logic of it all. it is when death is rendered graphically, is televised so to speak,
that you sense an eerie separation between your condition and yourself. a network of symbols has been
introduced, an entire awesome technology wrested from the gods. it makes you feel like a stranger in your
own dying.

i wanted my academic gown and dark glasses.

when  i  got  back  to  the  other  end  of  the  barracks,  the  three  younger  children  were  asleep,
heinrich was making notations on a road map and babette was seated some distance away with old man
treadwell and a number of other blind people. she was reading to them from a small and brightly colored
stack of supermarket tabloids.
i needed a distraction. i found a camp chair and set it near the wall behind babette. there were

four  blind  people,  a  nurse  and  three  sighted  people  arranged  in  a  semicircle  facing  the  reader.  others
occasionally paused to listen to an item or two, then moved on. babette employed her storytelling voice,
the same sincere and lilting tone she used when she read fairy tales to wilder or erotic passages to her
husband in their brass bed high above the headlong traffic hum.

to the designated page.

"scientists  at  princeton's  famed  institute  for  advanced  studies  have  stunned  the  world  by
presenting absolute and undeniable proof of life after death. a researcher at the world-renowned institute
has  used  hypnosis  to  induce  hundreds  of  people  to  recall  their  previous-life  experiences  as  pyramid-
builders, exchange students and extraterrestrials."
babette changed her voice to do dialogue.


'"in the last year alone,' declares reincarnation hypnotist ling ti wan, 'i have helped hundreds to
regress to previous lives under hypnosis. one of my most amazing subjects was a woman who was able
to recall her life as a hunter-gatherer in the mesolithic era ten thousand years ago. it was remarkable to
hear this tiny senior citizen in polyester slacks describe her life as a hulking male chieftain whose band
inhabited a peat bog and hunted wild boar with primitive bow and arrow. she was able to identify features
of that era which only a trained archaeologist could know about. she even spoke several phrases in the
language of that day, a tongue remarkably similar to modern-day german.'"
babette's voice resumed its tone of straight narration.


"dr. shiv chatterjee, fitness guru and high-energy physicist, recently stunned a live tv audience
by  relating  the  well-documented  case  of  two  women,  unknown  to  each  other,  who  came  to  him  for
regression in the same week, only to discover that they had been twin sisters in the lost city of atlantis fifty
thousand years ago. both women describe the city, before its mysterious and catastrophic plunge into the
sea,  as  a  clean  and  well-run  municipality  where  you  could  walk  safely  almost  any  time  of  day  or  night.
today they are food stylists for nasa.
"even more startling is the case of five-year-old patti weaver who has made convincing claims to

dr. chatterjee that in her previous-life experience she was the secret  kgb assassin responsible for the
unsolved murders of famed personalities howard hughes, marilyn monroe and elvis presley. known
in international espionage circles as 'the viper' for the deadly and untraceable venom he injected into the
balls of the  feet of his celebrity victims,  the assassin  died in a  fiery  moscow helicopter crash just hours
before  little  patti  weaver  was  born  in  popular  mechanics,  iowa.  she  not  only  has  the  same  bodily
markings as the viper but seems to have a remarkable knack for picking up russian words and phrases.

"'i  regressed  this  subject  at  least  a  dozen  times,'  says  dr.  chatterjee.  'i  used  the  toughest
professional techniques to get her to contradict herself. but her story is remarkably consistent. it is a tale
of the good that can come from evil.' says little patti, 'at the moment of my death as the viper, i saw a
glowing  circle  of  light.  it  seemed  to  welcome  me,  to  beckon.  it  was  a  warm  spiritual  experience.  i  just
walked right toward it. i was not sad at all.'"

babette did the voices of dr. chatterjee and patti weaver. her chatterjee was a warm and mellow
indian-accented english, with clipped phrasing. she did patti as a child-hero in a contemporary movie, the
only person on screen who is unawed by mysterious throbbing phenomena.

"in  a  further  startling  development  it  was  revealed  by  little  patti  that  the  three  supercelebrities
were  murdered  for  the  same  astonishing  reason.  each  of  them  at  the  time  of  his  or  her  death  was  in
secret  possession  of  the  holy  shroud  of  turin,  famed  for  its  sacred  curative  powers.  entertainers  elvis



66

life  after  death,  everlasting

life,  previous-life  experiences,  posthumous

life

"the  ghost  of  elvis  presley  will  be  seen  taking  lonely  walks  at  dawn  around  graceland,  his

"a japanese consortium will buy air force one and turn it into a luxury flying condominium with

"the spirit of lyndon b. johnson will contact cbs executives to arrange an interview on live tv in

babette read an ad. the stanford linear accelerator 3-day particle-smashing diet.
she picked up another tabloid. the cover story concerned the country's leading psychics and their

and marilyn were drink-and-drug nightmare victims and secretly hoped to restore spiritual and bodily calm
to  their  lives  by  actually  drying  themselves  with  the  holy  shroud  after  pore-cleansing  sessions  in  the
sauna.  multi-faceted  billionaire  howard  hughes  suffered  from  stop-action  blink  syndrome,  a  bizarre
condition which prevented his eyes from reopening for hours after a simple blink, and he obviously hoped
to  utilize  the  amazing  power  of  the  shroud  until  the  viper  intervened  with  a  swift  injection  of  phantom
venom. patti weaver has further revealed under hypnosis that the kgb has long sought possession of the
shroud  of  turin  on  behalf  of  the  rapidly  aging  and  pain-racked  members  of  the  politburo,  the  famed
executive  committee  of  the  communist  party.  possession  of  the  shroud  is  said  to  be  the  real  motive
behind  the  attempted  assassination  of  pope  john  paul  ii  at  the  vatican--an  attempt  that  failed  only
because the viper had already died in a horror helicopter crash and been reborn as a freckle-faced girl in
iowa.
"the no-risk bonus coupon below gives you guaranteed access to dozens of documented cases

of
in  outer  space,
transmigration  of  souls,  and  personalized  resurrection  through  stream-of-consciousness  computer
techniques."

i studied the faces in the semicircle. no one seemed amazed by this account. old man treadwell
lit a cigarette, impatient with his own trembling hand, forced to shake out the flame before it burned him.
there was no interest shown in discussion.  the story occupied some recess of passive belief. there  it
was, familiar and comforting in its own strange way, a set of statements no less real than our daily quota
of  observable  household  fact.  even  babette  in  her  tone  of  voice  betrayed  no  sign  of  skepticism  or
condescension. surely i was in no position to feel superior to these elderly listeners, blind or sighted. little
patti's walk  toward the warm welcoming glow found  me in a weakened and receptive state.  i wanted to
believe at least this part of the tale.


predictions for the coming year. she read the items slowly.

"squadrons of ufos will invade disney world and cape canaveral. in a startling twist, the attack
will be revealed as a demonstration of the folly of war, leading to a nuclear test-ban treaty between the u.
s. and russia.

musical mansion.

midair refueling privileges and air-to-surface missile capability.

"bigfoot will appear dramatically at a campsite  in  the  rugged and scenic  pacific northwest. the
hairy,  upright  man-beast,  who  stands  eight  feet  tall  and  may  be  evolution's  missing  link,  will  gently
welcome tourists to gather around him, revealing himself to be an apostle of peace.

"ufos  will  raise  the  lost  city  of  atlantis  from  its  watery  grave  in  the  caribbean  by  telekinetic
means and the help of powerful cables with properties not known in earthlike materials. the result will be
a 'city of peace' where money and passports are totally unknown.

order to defend itself against charges made in recent books.

new career as a rock lyricist from his prison cell on murderer's row.

"members of an air-crash cult will hijack a jumbo jet and crash it into the white house in an act of
blind devotion to their mysterious and reclusive leader, known only as uncle bob. the president and first
lady will miraculously survive with minor cuts, according to close friends of the couple.


space will lead to cures for anxiety, obesity and mood swings.

"from  beyond  the  grave,  dead  living  legend  john  wayne  will  communicate  telepathically  with
president reagan to help frame u. s. foreign policy. mellowed by death, the strapping actor will advocate
a hopeful policy of peace and love.

for weeks before negotiating a surrender on live tv in the offices of international creative management.

"earth's only satellite, the  moon, will explode on  a humid night  in july, playing havoc with tides
and raining dirt and debris over much of our planet. but ufo cleanup crews will help avert a worldwide
disaster, signalling an era of peace and harmony."


"dead multibillionaire howard hughes will mysteriously appear in the sky over las vegas.
"wonder drugs mass-produced aboard ufo pharmaceutical labs in the weightless environment of

"beatle assassin mark david chapman will legally change his name to john lennon and begin a

i watched the audience. folded arms, heads slightly tilted. the predictions did not seem reckless

"sixties superkiller charles manson will break out of prison and terrorize the california countryside

 67

to them. they were content to exchange brief and unrelated remarks, as during a break for a commercial
on tv. the tabloid future, with its mechanism of a hopeful twist to apocalyptic events, was perhaps not so
very  remote  from  our  own  immediate  experience.  look  at  us,  i  thought.  forced  out  of  our  homes,  sent
streaming  into  the  bitter  night,  pursued  by  a  toxic  cloud,  crammed  together  in  makeshift  quarters,
ambiguously death-sentenced. we'd become part of the public stuff of media disaster. the small audience
of the old and blind recognized the predictions of the psychics as events so near to happening that they
had to be shaped in advance to our needs and wishes. out of some persistent sense of large-scale ruin,
we kept inventing hope.

babette read an ad for diet sunglasses. the old people listened with interest. i went back to our
area. i wanted to be near the children, watch them sleep. watching children sleep makes me feel devout,
part of a spiritual system. it is the closest i can come to god. if there is a secular equivalent of standing in
a great spired cathedral with marble pillars and streams of mystical light slanting through two-tier gothic
windows, it would be watching children in their little bedrooms fast asleep. girls especially.

most of the lights were out now. the barracks roar had subsided. people were settling in. heinrich
was still awake, sitting on the floor, fully dressed, his back to the wall, reading a red cross resuscitation
manual. he was not,  in any case, a child whose lustrous slumber brought me peace.  a restless, teeth-
grinding and erratic sleeper,  the boy sometimes  fell  from his bed, to be found in a fetal bundle by early
light, shivering on the hardwood floor. "they seem to have things under control," i said.
"who?"

"whoever's in charge out there."

"who's in charge?"

"never mind."


"it's like we've been flung back in time," he said. "here we are in the stone age, knowing all these
great things after centuries of progress but what can we do to make life easier for the stone agers? can
we  make  a  refrigerator?  can  we  even  explain  how  it  works?  what  is  electricity?  what  is  light?  we
experience these things every day of our lives but what good does it do if we find ourselves hurled back in
time  and  we  can't  even  tell  people  the  basic  principles  much  less  actually  make  something  that  would
improve conditions. name one thing you could make. could you make a simple wooden match that you
could  strike  on  a  rock  to  make  a  flame?  we  think  we're  so  great  and  modern.  moon  landings,  artificial
hearts. but what if you were hurled into a time warp and came face to face with the ancient greeks. the
greeks invented trigonometry. they did autopsies and dissections. what could you tell an ancient greek
that he couldn't say, 'big deal.' could you  tell him  about  the atom?  atom  is a greek word. the greeks
knew  that  the  major  events  in  the  universe  can't  be  seen  by  the  eye  of  man.  it's  waves,  it's  rays,  it's
particles."
"we're doing all right."

"we're sitting in this huge moldy room. it's like we're flung back."

"we have heat, we have light."


"these are stone age things. they had heat and light. they had fire. they rubbed flints together
and made sparks. could you rub flints together? would you know a flint if you saw one? if a stoner ager
asked you what a nucleotide is, could you tell him? how do we make carbon paper? what is glass? if you
came awake tomorrow in the middle ages and there was an epidemic raging, what could you do to stop it,
knowing what you know about the progress of medicines and diseases? here it is practically the twenty-
first  century  and  you've  read  hundreds  of  books  and  magazines  and  seen  a  hundred  tv  shows  about
science and medicine. could you tell those people one little crucial thing that might save a million and a
half lives?"




of this circle of people. they use pebble tools. they eat grubs. explain a radio."

up by receivers."

"they travel through the air. what, like birds? why not tell them magic? they travel through the
air in magic waves. what is a nucleotide? you don't know, do you? yet these are the building blocks of
life. what good is knowledge if it just floats in the air? it goes from computer to computer. it
changes and grows every second of every day. but nobody actually knows anything."



"'boil your water,' i'd tell them."
"sure. what about 'wash behind your ears.' that's about as good."
"i still think we're doing fairly well. there was no warning. we have food, we have radios."
"what is a radio? what is the principle of a radio? go ahead, explain. you're sitting in the middle

"there's no mystery. powerful transmitters send signals. they travel through the air, to be picked

"you know something. you know about nyodene d. i saw you with those people."
"that was a one-time freak," he told me.



68

"the women don't seem busy," i said.
"i don't think this is the kind of disaster that leads to sexual abandon.
one or two fellows might come skulking out eventually but there won't be an orgiastic horde, not


he  went  back  to  his  reading.  i  decided  to  get  some  air.  outside  there  were  several  groups  of
people  standing  around  fires  in  fifty-five-gallon  drums.  a  man  sold  soft  drinks  and  sandwiches  from  an
open-sided  vehicle.  parked  nearby  were  school  buses,  motorcycles,  smallish  vans  called  ambulettes.  i
walked  around  a  while.  there  were  people  asleep  in  cars,  others  pitching  tents.  beams  of  light  swung
slowly through the woods, searching out sounds, calm voices calling. i walked past a carload of prostitutes
from iron city. the interior light was on, the faces occupied the windows. they resembled the checkout
women at the supermarket, blondish, double-chinned, resigned. a man leaned against the front door on
the driver's side, speaking through a small opening in the window, his breath showing white. a radio said:
"hog futures have declined in sympathy, adding bearishness to that market."

i realized the man talking to the prostitutes was murray jay siskind. i walked over there, waited
for him to finish his sentence before addressing him. he took off his right glove to shake my hand. the car
window went up.
"i thought you were in new york for the term break."


"i came back early to look at car-crash movies. alfonse arranged a week of screenings to help me
prepare for my seminar. i was on the airport bus heading in from iron city when sirens started blowing.
the driver didn't have much choice but to follow the traffic out here."
"where are you spending the night?"


"the whole bus was assigned to one of  the outbuildings. i heard a rumor about painted women
and came out to investigate. one of them is dressed in leopard loungewear under her coat. she showed
me.  another  one  says  she  has  a  snap-off  crotch.  what  do  you  think  she  means  by  that?  i'm  a  little
worried, though, about all these outbreaks of lifestyle diseases. i carry a reinforced ribbed condom at all
times.  one  size  fits  all.  but  i  have  a  feeling  it's  not  much  protection  against  the  intelligence  and
adaptability of the modern virus."



tonight anyway."



interview i'd had with the simuvac man.

"that little breath of nyodene has planted a death in my body. it is now official, according to the
computer. i've got death inside me. it's just a question of whether or not i can outlive it. it has a life span of
its own. thirty years. even if it doesn't kill me in a direct way, it will probably outlive me in my own body. i
could die in a plane crash and the nyodene d. would be thriving as my remains were laid to rest."

"this is the nature of modern death," murray said. "it has a life independent of us. it is growing in
prestige and dimension. it has a sweep  it never had  before. we study it  objectively. we can predict its
appearance,  trace  its  path  in  the  body.  we  can  take  cross-section  pictures  of  it,  tape  its  tremors  and
waves. we've never been so close to it, so familiar with its habits and attitudes. we know it intimately. but
it continues to grow, to acquire breadth and scope, new outlets, new passages and means. the more we
learn,  the  more  it  grows.  is  this  some  law  of  physics?  every  advance  in  knowledge  and  technique  is
matched by a new kind of death, a new strain. death adapts, like a viral agent. is it a law of nature? or
some private superstition of mine? i sense that the dead are closer to us than ever. i sense that we inhabit
the same air as the dead. remember lao tse. there is no difference between the quick and the dead.
they  are  one  channel  of  vitality.'  he  said  this  six  hundred  years  before  christ.  it  is  true  once  again,
perhaps more true than ever."

he placed his hands on my shoulders and looked sadly into my face. he told me in the simplest
words how sorry he was about what had happened. he talked to me about the likelihood of a computer
error.  computers  make  mistakes,  he  said.  carpet  static  can  cause  a  mistake.  some  lint  or  hair  in  the
circuits.  he  didn't  believe  this  and  neither  did  i.  but  he  spoke  convincingly,  his  eyes  filled  with
spontaneous emotion, a broad and profound feeling. i felt oddly rewarded. his compassion was equal to
the occasion, an impressive pity and grief. the bad news was almost worth it.

"ever  since  i  was  in  my  twenties,  i've  had  the  fear,  the  dread.  now  it's  been  realized.  i  feel
enmeshed, i feel deeply involved. it's no wonder they call this thing the airborne toxic event. it's an event
all right. it marks the end of uneventful things. this is just the beginning. wait and see."

vendor closed down his van. "any episodes of déjà vu in your group?"

"wife and daughter," i said. "there's a theory about déjà vu."

"i guess people need time to go through certain stages."
"it's obvious," he said.
i  told  him  i'd  spent  two  and  a  half  minutes  exposed  to  the  toxic  cloud.  then  i  summarized  the

a  talk-show  host  said:  "you  are  on  the  air."  the  fires  burned  in  the  oil  drums.  the  sandwich

 69

he  put  his  hands  back  on  my  shoulders,  studied  me  with  renewed  and  touching  sadness.  we

"have you checked with your representative?" he said.
she rolled down the window to peer at him. she had the opaque look of a hair-curlered woman on

"you know who i mean," murray said. "the fellow who sees to your emotional needs in return for

"bobby? he's in iron city, keeping out of the cloud. he doesn't like to expose himself unless it's

"i'd like to lose interest in myself," i told murray. "is there any chance of that happening?"
"none. better men have tried."
"i guess you're right."
"it's obvious."
"i wish there was something i could do. i wish i could out-think the problem."
"work harder on your hitler," he said.
i looked at him. how much did he know?
the car window opened a crack. one of the women said to murray, "all right, i'll do it for twenty-

"i don't want to hear it."

"why do we think these things happened before? simple. they did happen before, in our minds,

as  visions  of  the  future.  because  these  are  precognitions,  we  can't  fit  the  material  into  our  system  of
consciousness as it is now structured. this is basically supernatural stuff. we're seeing into the future but
haven't learned how to process the experience. so it stays hidden until the precognition comes true, until
we  come  face  to  face  with  the  event.  now  we  are  free  to  remember  it,  to  experience  it  as  familiar
material."
"why are so many people having these episodes now?"


"because death is in the air," he said gently. "it is liberating suppressed material. it is getting us
closer to  things we haven't learned about  ourselves.  most  of us  have probably seen our own death but
haven't known how to make the material surface. maybe when we die, the first thing we'll say is, 'i know
this feeling. i was here before.'"

heard the prostitutes call out to someone.








five."


the evening news whose house had been buried in mud.

one hundred percent of your earnings. the fellow you depend on to beat you up when you're bad."

absolutely necessary."

identify them as people bound together in ways not easily appreciated by the rest of us.

likes to use his mind."

theirs. the windows went up.

dollars?"


thought, gazing at the car. the windows were fogged, the women's heads capped in cigarette smoke.
"of course we'd have to find a vertical space," he said absently.

"you don't really expect her to lodge a chunk of food in her windpipe."


he  looked  at  me,  half  startled.  "what?  no,  no,  that  won't  be  necessary.  as  long  as  she  makes
gagging and choking sounds. as long as she sighs deeply when i jolt the pelvis. as long as she collapses
helplessly backward into my life-saving embrace."

he took off his glove to shake my hand. then he went over to the car to work out details with the
woman in question. i watched him knock on the rear door. after a moment it opened and he squeezed into
the  back  seat.  i  walked  over  to  one  of  the  oil  drums.  three  men  and  a  woman  stood  around  the  fire,
passing rumors back and forth.

three of the live deer at the kung fu palace were dead. the governor was dead, his pilot and co-
pilot seriously injured after a crash landing in a shopping mall. two of the men at the switching yard were
dead, tiny acid burns visible in their mylex suits. packs of german shepherds, the nyodene-sniffing dogs,
had  shed  their  parachutes  and  were  being  set  loose  in  the  affected  communities.  there  was  a  rash  of
ufo  sightings  in  the  area.  there  was  widespread  looting  by  men  in  plastic  sheets.  two'  looters  were
dead. six national guardsmen were dead, killed in a firefight that broke out after a racial incident. there
were  reports  of  miscarriages,  babies  born  prematurely.  there  were  sightings  of  additional  billowing
clouds.

"the heimlich maneuver."
i  studied  the  part  of  his  face  that  lay  between  the  touring  cap  and  beard.  he  seemed  deep  in

the  women  laughed,  six  heads  bobbing.  it  was  insider's  laughter,  a  little  overdone,  meant  to

a  second  window  opened  half  an  inch,  a  bright  mouth  appeared.  "the  type  pimp  bobby  is,  he

a  second  round  of  laughter.  we  weren't  sure  whether  it  was  at  bobby's  expense,  or  ours,  or

"it's  none  of  my  business,"  i  said,  "but  what  is  it  she's  willing  to  do  with  you  for  twenty-five



70


the  people  who  relayed  these  pieces  of  unverified  information  did  so  with  a  certain  respectful
dread, bouncing on their toes in the cold, arms crossed on their chests. they were fearful that the stories
might be true but at  the same time impressed by the dramatic character  of  things.  the toxic event had
released  a  spirit  of  imagination.  people  spun  tales,  others  listened  spellbound.  there  was  a  growing
respect for the vivid rumor, the most chilling tale. we were no closer to believing or disbelieving a given
story than we had been earlier. but there was a greater appreciation now. we began to marvel at our own
ability to manufacture awe.

german shepherds. that was the reassuring news i took inside with me. the sturdy body, dense
and  darkish  coat,  fierce  head,  long  lapping  tongue.  i  pictured  them  prowling  the  empty  streets,  heavy-
gaited, alert. able to hear sounds we couldn't hear, able to sense changes in the flow of information. i saw
them in our house, snouting into closets, tall ears pointed, a smell about them of heat and fur and stored
power.

in  the  barracks  almost  everyone  was  sleeping.  i  made  my  way  along  a  dim  wall.  the  massed
bodies  lay  in  heavy  rest,  seeming  to  emit  a  single  nasal  sigh.  figures  stirred;  a  wide-eyed  asian  child
watched  me  step  among  a  dozen  clustered  sleeping  bags.  colored  lights  skipped  past  my  right  ear.  i
heard a toilet flush.

babette  was  curled  on  an  air  mattress,  covered  in  her  coat.  my  son  slept  sitting  in  a  chair  like
some  boozed  commuter,  head  rolling  on  his  chest.  i  carried  a  camp  chair  over  to  the  cot  where  the
younger children were. then i sat there, leaning forward, to watch them sleep.

a random tumble of heads and dangled limbs. in those soft warm faces was a quality of trust so
absolute  and  pure  that  i  did  not  want  to  think  it  might  be  misplaced.  there  must  be  something,
somewhere, large and grand and redoubtable enough to justify this shining reliance and implicit belief. a
feeling  of  desperate  piety  swept  over  me.  it  was  cosmic  in  nature,  full  of  yearnings  and  teachings.  it
spoke of vast distances, awesome but subtle forces. these sleeping children were like figures in an ad for
the rosicrucians, drawing a powerful beam of light from somewhere off the page. steffie turned slightly,
then muttered something in her sleep. it seemed important that i know what it was. in my current state,
bearing the death impression of the nyodene cloud, i was ready to search anywhere for signs and hints,
intimations  of  odd  comfort.  i  pulled  my  chair  up  closer.  her  face  in  pouchy  sleep  might  have  been  a
structure designed solely to protect the eyes, those great, large and apprehensive things, prone to color
phases and a darting alertness, to a perception of distress in others. i sat there watching her. moments
later she spoke again. distinct syllables this time, not some dreamy murmur--but a language not quite of
this world. i struggled to understand. i was convinced she was saying something, fitting together units of
stable meaning. i watched her face, waited. ten minutes passed. she uttered two clearly audible words,
familiar and elusive at the same time, words that seemed to have a ritual meaning, part of a verbal spell or
ecstatic chant.

toyota celica.

a  long  moment  passed  before  i  realized  this  was  the  name  of  an  automobile.  the  truth  only
amazed me more. the utterance was beautiful and mysterious, gold-shot with looming wonder. it was like
the name of an ancient power in the sky, tablet-carved in cuneiform. it made me feel that something
hovered. but how could this be? a simple brand name, an ordinary car. how could these near-nonsense
words,  murmured  in  a  child's  restless  sleep,  make  me  sense  a  meaning,  a  presence?  she  was  only
repeating  some  tv  voice.  toyota  corolla,  toyota  celica,  toyota  cressida.  supranational  names,
computer-generated,  more  or  less  universally  pronounceable.  part  of  every  child's  brain  noise,  the
substatic  regions  too  deep  to  probe.  whatever  its  source,  the  utterance  struck  me  with  the  impact  of  a
moment of splendid transcendence.
i depend on my children for that.


i sat a while longer, watching denise, watching wilder, feeling selfless and spiritually large. there
was an empty air mattress on the floor but i wanted to share babette's and eased myself next to her body,
a dreaming mound. her hands, feet and face were drawn under the sheltering coat; only a burst of hair
remained.  i  fell  at  once  into  marine  oblivion,  a  deep-dwelling  crablike  consciousness,  silent  and
dreamless.


it seemed only minutes later that i was surrounded by noise and commotion. i opened my eyes to
find denise pounding on my arms and shoulders. when she saw i was awake, she began battering her
mother.  all  around  us,  people  were  dressing  and  packing.  the  major  noise  issued  from  sirens  in  the
ambulettes outside. a voice was instructing us through a bullhorn. in the distance i heard a clanging bell
and then a series of automobile horns, the first of what would become a universal bleat, a herd-panic of
terrible  wailing  proportions  as  vehicles  of  all  sizes  and  types  tried  to  reach  the  parkway  in  the  quickest

 71

denise,  who  was  clutching  her  mother  by  the  wrist,  flung  the  entire  arm  down  on  the  mattress.

babette turned over on the mattress, sighing contentedly. "five more minutes, "she said. the girls

possible time.
i managed to sit up. both girls were trying to rouse babette. the room was emptying out. i saw

heinrich staring down at me, an enigmatic grin on his face. the amplified voice said: "wind change, wind
change. cloud has changed direction. toxic, toxic, heading here.".

rained blows on her head and arms.

i got to my feet, looked around for a men's room. wilder was dressed, eating a cookie while he
waited.  again  the  voice  spoke,  like  singsong  patter  on  a  department-store  loudspeaker,  amid  the
perfumed counters and chiming bells: "toxic, toxic. proceed to your vehicle, proceed to your vehicle."

"why does he have to say everything twice? we get it the first time. he just wants to hear himself talk."

they got babette up on all fours. i hurried off to the toilet. i had my toothpaste but couldn't find the
brush. i spread some paste on my index finger and ran the finger across my teeth. when i got back, they
were dressed and ready, heading for the exit. a woman with an armband handed out masks at the door,
gauzy white surgical masks that covered the nose and mouth. we took six and went outside.

it was still dark. a heavy rain fell. before us lay a scene of panoramic disorder. cars trapped in
mud,  cars  stalled,  cars  crawling  along  the  one-lane  escape  route,  cars  taking  shortcuts  through  the
woods,  cars  hemmed  in  by  trees,  boulders,  other  cars.  sirens  called  and  faded,  horns  blared  in
desperation and protest. there were running men, tents wind-blown into trees, whole families abandoning
their  vehicles  to  head  on  foot  for  the  parkway.  from  deep  in  the  woods  we  heard  motorcycles  revving,
voices raising incoherent cries. it was like the fall of a colonial capital to dedicated rebels. a great surging
drama with elements of humiliation and guilt.

we put on our  masks and ran through  the downpour  to our car. not  ten yards away a group of
men  proceeded  calmly  to  a  land-rover.  they  resembled  instructors  in  jungle  warfare,  men  with  lean
frames and long boxy heads. they drove straight into dense underbrush, not only away from the dirt road
but away from all the other cars attempting shortcuts. their bumper sticker read gun control is mind
control. in situations  like  this, you want  to stick close to people  in right-wing  fringe groups.  they've
practiced staying alive. i followed with some difficulty, our smallish wagon jouncing badly in brush tangles,
up inclines, over hidden stones. inside five minutes the land-rover was out of sight.
rain turned to sleet, sleet to snow.


i saw a line of headlights far to the right and drove fifty yards through a gulley in that direction, the
car heeled like a toboggan. we did not seem to be getting closer to the lights. babette turned on the radio
and we were told that the boy scout camp evacuees were to head for iron city, where arrangements were
being  made  to  provide  food  and  shelter.  we  heard  horns  blowing  and  thought  it  was  a  reaction  to  the
radio  announcement  but  they  continued  in  a  rapid  and  urgent  cadence,  conveying  through  the  stormy
night a sense of animal fear and warning.

then we heard the rotors. through the stark trees we saw it, the immense toxic cloud, lighted now
by  eighteen  choppers--  immense  almost  beyond  comprehension,  beyond  legend  and  rumor,  a  roiling
bloated slug-shaped  mass. it seemed  to be generating its own inner storms. there were cracklings and
sputterings, flashes  of light, long  looping streaks of chemical  flame. the car horns  blared and moaned.
the helicopters throbbed like giant appliances. we sat in the car, in the snowy woods, saying nothing. the
great  cloud,  beyond  its  turbulent  core,  was  silver-tipped  in  the  spotlights.  it  moved  horribly  and  sluglike
through the night, the choppers seeming to putter ineffectually around its edges. in its tremendous size, its
dark  and  bulky  menace,  its  escorting  aircraft,  the  cloud  resembled  a  national  promotion  for  death,  a
multimillion-dollar campaign backed by radio spots, heavy print and billboard, tv saturation. there was a
high-tension discharge of vivid light. the horn-blowing increased in volume.

came back to me in terrible detail. i felt sick on several levels.

there was nothing to do but try to get the family to safety. i kept pushing toward the headlights,
the sound of blowing horns. wilder was asleep, planing in uniform spaces. i hit the accelerator, jerked the
wheel, arm-wrestled the car through a stand of white pine.


midsummer day on the front porch.



tricky. how many people even know they have a lens? they think 'lens' must be 'camera.'"

"your own eye. do you know which part is which?"
"you mean like the iris, the pupil?"
"those are the publicized parts. what about the vitreous body? what about the lens? the lens is

i recalled with a shock  that  i was technically dead.  the interview with  the  simuvac technician

through his mask heinrich said, "did you ever really look at your eye?"
"what do you mean?" denise said, showing immediate interest, as though we were lazing away a



72

"what about the ear?" denise said in a muffled voice.
"if  the  eye is  a  mystery, totally forget the ear. just say 'cochlea'  to somebody,  they  look at you



like, 'who's this guy?' there's this whole world right inside our own body."
"nobody even cares," she said.

"how can people live their whole lives without knowing the names of their own parts of the body?"

"what about the glands?" she said.

"animal glands you can eat. the arabs eat glands."

"the french eat glands," babette said through gauze. 'the arabs eat eyes, speaking of eyes."

"what parts?" denise said.

"the whole eye. the sheep eye."

"they don't eat the lashes," heinrich said.

"do sheep have lashes?" steffie said.

"ask your father," babette said.


the car forded a creek which i didn't know was there until we were in it. i struggled to get us over
the opposite bank. snow fell thickly through the high beams. the muffled dialogue went on. i reflected that
our current predicament seemed  to be of merely glancing interest  to some  of  us.  i wanted  them  to pay
attention  to  the  toxic  event.  i  wanted  to  be  appreciated  for  my  efforts  in  getting  us  to  the  parkway.  i
thought of telling them about the computer tally, the time-factored death i carried in my chromosomes and
blood. self-pity oozed through my soul. i tried to relax and enjoy it.

"i'll give anybody in this car five dollars," heinrich said through his protective mask, "if you can tell
me whether more people died building the pyramids in egypt or building the great wall of china--and you
have to say how many died in each place, within fifty people."

i followed three snowmobiles across an open field. they conveyed a mood of clever fun. the toxic
event was still in view, chemical  tracers shooting  in slow arcs out of its interior.  we passed families on
foot, saw a line of paired red lights winding through the dark. when we edged out of the woods, people in
other cars gave us sleepy looks. it took ninety minutes to reach the parkway, another thirty to get to the
cloverleaf, where we spun off toward iron city. it was here that we met up with the group from the kung
fu palace. tooting horns, waving children. like wagon trains converging on the santa fe trail. the cloud
still hung in the rearview mirror.
krylon, rust-oleum, red devil.


we reached iron city at dawn.  there were checkpoints at all  the road exits.  state  troopers and
red cross workers handed out mimeographed instructions concerning evacuation centers. half an hour
later we found ourselves, with forty other families, in an abandoned karate studio on the top floor of a four-
story building on the main street. there were no beds or chairs. steffie refused to take off her mask.

by  nine  a.  m.  we  had  a  supply  of  air  mattresses,  some  food  and  coffee.  through  the  dusty
windows we saw a group of turbaned schoolchildren, members of the local sikh community, standing in
the street with a hand-lettered sign: iron city welcomes area evacuees. we were not allowed to
leave the building.

human hand.
at noon a rumor swept the city. technicians were being lowered in slings from army helicopters in

order  to  plant  microorganisms  in  the  core  of  the  toxic  cloud.  these  organisms  were  genetic
recombinations  that  had  a  built-in  appetite  for  the  particular  toxic  agents  in  nyodene  d.  they  would
literally consume the billowing cloud, eat it up, break it down, decompose it.

this stunning innovation, so similar in nature to something we might come across in the national
enquirer or the star, made us feel a little weary, glutted in an insubstantial way, as after a junk food spree.
i wandered through the room, as i'd done in the boy scout barracks, moving from one conversational knot
to another. no one seemed to know how a group of microorganisms could consume enough toxic material
to rid the sky of such a dense and enormous cloud. no one knew what would happen to the toxic waste
once it was eaten or to the microorganisms once they were finished eating.

babette sat alone in a scarf and knitted cap.


toxic event."

"i  think  there's  every  chance  in  the  world.  i  don't  doubt  for  a  minute  they  have  these  little
organisms  packaged  in  cardboard  with  plastic  see-through  bubbles,  like  ballpoint  refills.  that's  what
worries me."

"i don't like this latest rumor," she said.
"too far-fetched? you think there's no chance a bunch of organisms can eat their way through the

on  the  wall  of  the  studio  there  were  poster-size  illustrations  of  the  six  striking  surfaces  of  the

everywhere in the room children were striking mock karate poses. when i got back to our area,

 73

"you feel a vague foreboding," i said.
"i feel they're working on the superstitious part of my nature. every advance is worse than the one

"the very existence of custom-made organisms."

"the very idea, the very existence, the wondrous ingenuity. on the one hand i definitely admire it.

just to think there are people out there who can conjure such things. a cloud-eating microbe or whatever.
there is just no end of surprise.  all the amazement that's left in the world is microscopic. but i can live
with that. what scares me is have they thought it through completely?"


before because it makes me more scared."
"scared of what?"

"the sky, the earth, i don't know."

"the greater the scientific advance, the more primitive the fear."

"why is that?" she said.


at three p. m. steffie was still wearing the protective mask. she walked along the walls, a set of
pale green eyes, discerning, alert, secretive. she watched people as if they could not see her watching, as
if the mask covered her eyes instead of leaving them exposed. people thought she was playing a game.
they winked at her, said hi. i was certain it would take at least another day before she felt safe enough to
remove the protective device. she was solemn about warnings, interpreted danger as a state too lacking
in detail and precision to be confined to a certain time and place. i knew we would simply have to wait for
her to forget the amplified voice, the sirens, the night ride through the woods. in the meantime the mask,
setting  off  her  eyes,  dramatized  her  sensitivity  to  episodes  of  stress  and  alarm.  it  seemed  to  bring  her
closer to the real concerns of the world, honed her in its wind.

at  seven  p.  m.  a  man  carrying  a  tiny  tv  set  began  to  walk  slowly  through  the  room,  making  a
speech as he went. he was middle-aged or older, a clear-eyed and erect man wearing a fur-lined cap with
lowered flaps. he held the tv set well up in the air and out away from his body and during the course of
his speech he turned completely around several times as he walked in order to display the blank screen to
all of us in the room.

"there's nothing on network," he said to us. "not a word, not a picture. on the glassboro channel
we rate fifty-two words by actual count. no film footage, no live report. does this kind of thing happen so
often that nobody cares anymore? don't those people know what we've been through? we were scared to
death.  we  still  are.  we  left  our  homes,  we  drove  through  blizzards,  we  saw  the  cloud.  it  was  a  deadly
specter,  right  there  above  us.  is  it  possible  nobody  gives  substantial  coverage  to  such  a  thing?  half  a
minute, twenty seconds? are they telling us it was insignificant, it was piddling? are they so callous? are
they so bored by spills and contaminations and wastes? do they think this is just television? 'there's too
much television already--why show more?' don't they know it's real? shouldn't the streets be crawling with
cameramen  and  soundmen  and  reporters?  shouldn't  we  be  yelling  out  the  window  at  them,  'leave  us
alone, we've been through enough, get out of here with your vile instruments of intrusion.' do they have to
have two hundred dead, rare disaster footage, before they come flocking to a given site in their helicopters
and network limos? what exactly has to happen before they stick microphones in our faces and hound us
to the doorsteps of our homes, camping out on our lawns, creating the usual media circus? haven't we
earned the right to despise their idiot questions? look at us in this place. we are quarantined. we are like
lepers in medieval times. they won't let us out of here. they leave food at the foot of the stairs and tiptoe
away  to  safety.  this  is  the  most  terrifying  time  of  our  lives.  everything  we  love  and  have  worked  for  is
under serious threat. but we look around and see no response from the official organs of the media. the
airborne toxic event is a horrifying thing. our fear is enormous. even if there hasn't been great loss of life,
don't we deserve some attention for our suffering, our human worry, our terror? isn't fear news?"

applause. a sustained burst of shouting and hand-clapping. the speaker slowly turned one more
time, displaying the little tv to his audience. when he completed his turn, he was face to face with me, no
more than ten inches away. a change came over his wind-beaten face, a slight befuddlement, the shock
of some minor fact jarred loose.
"i saw this before," he finally said to me.

"saw what before?"


"you  were  standing  there,  i  was  standing  here.  like  a  leap  into  the  fourth  dimension.  your
features  incredibly  sharp  and  clear.  light  hair,  washed-out  eyes,  pinkish  nose,  nondescript  mouth  and
chin,  sweaty-type  complexion,  average  jowls,  slumped  shoulders,  big  hands  and  feet.  it  all  happened
before. steam hissing in the pipes. tiny little hairs standing out in your pores. that identical look on your
face."



"what look?" i said.
"haunted, ashen, lost."



74

it was nine days before they told us we could go back home.





dylarama

ill



22

the supermarket is full of elderly people who look lost among the dazzling hedgerows. some people are
too small to reach the upper shelves; some people block the aisles with their carts; some are clumsy and
slow  to  react;  some  are  forgetful,  some  confused;  some  move  about  muttering  with  the  wary  look  of
people in institutional corridors.
i pushed my cart along the aisle. wilder sat inside, on the collapsible shelf, trying to grab items

whose shape and radiance excited his system of sensory analysis. there were two new developments in
the supermarket, a butcher's corner and a bakery, and the oven aroma of bread and cake combined with
the sight of a bloodstained man pounding at strips of living veal was pretty exciting for us all.
"dristan ultra, dristan ultra."


the other excitement was the snow. heavy snow predicted, later today or tonight. it brought out
the crowds, those who feared the roads would soon be impassable, those too old to walk safely in snow
and ice, those who thought the storm would isolate them in their homes for days or weeks. older people in
particular were susceptible to news of impending calamity as it was forecast on tv by grave men standing
before digital radar maps or pulsing photographs of the planet. whipped into a frenzy, they hurried to the
supermarket  to  stock  up  before  the  weather  mass  moved  in.  snow  watch,  said  the  forecasters.  snow
alert.  snowplows.  snow  mixed  with  sleet  and  freezing  rain.  it  was  already  snowing  in  the  west.  it  was
already  moving  to  the  east.  they  gripped  this  news  like  a  pygmy  skull.  snow  showers.  snow  flurries.
snow warnings. driving snow. blowing snow. deep and drifting snow. accumulations, devastations. the
old  people  shopped  in  a  panic.  when  tv  didn't  fill  them  with  rage,  it  scared  them  half  to  death.  they
whispered to each other in the checkout lines. traveler's advisory, zero visibility. when does it hit? how
many inches? how many days? they became secretive, shifty, appeared to withhold the latest and worst
news  from  others;  appeared  to  blend  a  cunning  with  their  haste,  tried  to  hurry  out  before  someone
questioned the extent of their purchases. hoarders in a war. greedy, guilty.

i saw murray in the generic food area, carrying a teflon skillet. i stopped to watch him for a while.
he talked to four or five people, occasionally pausing to scrawl some notes in a spiral book. he managed
to write with the skillet wedged awkwardly under his arm.
wilder called out to him, a tree-top screech, and i wheeled the cart over.

"how is that good woman of yours?"

"fine," i said.

"does this kid talk yet?"

"now and then. he likes to pick his spots."

"you know that matter you helped me with? the elvis presley power struggle?"

"sure. i came in and lectured."

"it turns out, tragically, that i would have won anyway."

"what happened?"

"cotsakis, my rival, is no longer among the living."

"what does that mean?"

"it means he's dead."

"dead?"

"lost in the surf off malibu. during the term break. i found out an hour ago. came right here."


i  was  suddenly  aware  of  the  dense  environmental  texture.  the  automatic  doors  opened  and
closed, breathing abruptly. colors and odors seemed sharper. the sound of gliding feet emerged from a
dozen  other  noises,  from  the  sublittoral  drone  of  maintenance  systems,  from  the  rustle  of  newsprint  as
shoppers  scanned  their  horoscopes  in  the  tabloids  up  front,  from  the  whispers  of  elderly  women  with
talcumed faces, from the steady rattle of cars going over a loose manhole cover just outside the entrance.
gliding feet. i heard them clearly, a sad numb shuffle in every aisle.



"how are the girls?" murray said.
"fine."

 75

"back in school?"

"yes."

"now that the scare is over."

"yes. steffie no longer wears her protective mask."

"i want to buy some new york cuts," he said, gesturing toward the butcher.

the phrase seemed familiar, but what did it mean?


"unpackaged meat, fresh bread," he went on. "exotic fruits, rare cheeses. products from twenty
countries. it's like being at some crossroads of the ancient world, a persian bazaar or boom town on the
tigris. how are you, jack?"
what did he mean, how are you?

"poor cotsakis, lost in the surf," i said. "that enormous man."

"that's the one."

"i don't know what to say."

"he was big all right."

"enormously so."

"i don't know what to say either. except better him than me."

"he must have weighed three hundred pounds."

"oh, easily."

"what do you think, two ninety, three hundred?"

"three hundred easily."

"dead. a big man like that.", "what can we say?"

"i thought i was big."

"he was on another level. you're big on your level."

"not that i knew him. i didn't know him at all."

"it's better not knowing them when they die. it's better them than us."

"to be so enormous. then to die."

"to be lost without a trace. to be swept away."

"i can picture him so clearly."

"it's strange in a way, isn't it," he said, "that we can picture the dead."


i took wilder along the fruit bins. the fruit was gleaming and wet, hard-edged. there was a self-
conscious quality about it. it looked carefully observed, like four-color fruit in a guide to photography. we
veered right at the plastic jugs of spring water and headed for the checkout. i liked being with wilder. the
world was a series of fleeting gratifications. he took what he could, then immediately forgot it in the rush of
a subsequent pleasure. it was this forgetfulness i envied and admired.

babyish voice.

some of the houses in town were showing signs of neglect. the park benches needed repair, the
broken streets needed resurfacing. signs of the times. but the supermarket did not change, except for the
better. it was well-stocked,  musical and bright. this was the key, it seemed to us.  everything was fine,
would continue to be fine, would eventually get even better as long as the supermarket did not slip.
early that evening i drove babette to her class in posture. we stopped on the parkway overpass

and  got  out  to  look  at  the  sunset.  ever  since  the  airborne  toxic  event,  the  sunsets  had  become  almost
unbearably  beautiful.  not  that  there  was  a  measurable  connection.  if  the  special  character  of  nyodene
derivative  (added  to  the  everyday  drift  of  effluents,  pollutants,  contaminants  and  deliriants)  had  caused
this  aesthetic  leap  from  already  brilliant  sunsets  to  broad  towering  ruddled  visionary  skyscapes,  tinged
with dread, no one had been able to prove it.



the blazing sky. it's so beautiful and dramatic. sunsets used to last five minutes. now they last an hour."
"why is that?"

"why is that?" she said.


this  spot  on  the  overpass  offered  a  broad  prospect  west.  people  had  been  coming  here  ever
since  the  first  of  the  new  sunsets,  parking  their  own  cars,  standing  around  in  the  bitter  wind  to  chat
nervously and look. there were four cars here already, others certain to come. the overpass had become
a scenic lookout. the police were reluctant to enforce the parking ban. it was one of those situations, like
the olympics for the handicapped, that make all the restrictions seem petty.


"what else can we believe?" babette said. "how else can we explain?"
"i don't know."
"we're not at the edge of the ocean or desert. we ought to have timid winter sunsets. but look at

the  woman  at  the  terminal  asked  him  a  number  of  questions,  providing  her  own  replies  in  a

later i drove back to the congregational church to pick her up. denise and wilder came along for



76

"what could you teach?" denise said.
"that's  just  it.  it's  practically  inexhaustible.  eat  light  foods  in  warm  weather.  drink  plenty  of

"how was class?" denise said.
"it's going so well they want me to teach another course."
"in what?"
"jack won't believe this."
"in what?" i said.
"eating and drinking. it's called eating and drinking: basic parameters. which, i admit, is a little

the  ride.  babette  in  jeans  and  legwarmers  was  a  fine  and  stirring  sight.  legwarmers  lend  a  note  of
paramilitary poise, a hint of archaic warriorhood. when she shoveled snow, she wore a furry headband as
well. it made me think of the fifth century a. d. men standing around campfires speaking in subdued tones
in their turkic and mongol dialects. clear skies. the fearless exemplary death of attila the hun.






more stupid than it absolutely has to be."


liquids."
"but everybody knows that."


"knowledge changes every day. people like to have their beliefs reinforced. don't lie down after
eating a heavy meal. don't drink liquor on an empty stomach. if you must swim, wait at least an hour after
eating. the world is  more complicated  for adults than it is for children. we didn't grow up with all  these
shifting  facts  and  attitudes.  one  day  they  just  started  appearing.  so  people  need  to  be  reassured  by
someone in a position of authority that a certain way to do something is the right way or the wrong way, at
least for the time being. i'm the closest they could find, that's all."
a staticky piece of lint clung to the tv screen.


in bed we lay quietly,  my head between her breasts,  cushioned as if against some remorseless
blow. i was determined not to tell her about the computer verdict. i knew she would be devastated to learn
that my death would almost surely precede hers. her body became the agency of my resolve, my silence.
nightly i moved toward her breasts, nuzzling into that designated space like a wounded sub into its repair
dock. i drew courage from her breasts, her warm mouth, her browsing hands, from the skimming tips of
her fingers on my back. the lighter the touch, the more determined i was to keep her from knowing. only
her own desperation could break my will.

once  i  almost  asked  her  to  put  on  legwarmers  before  we  made  love.  but  it  seemed  a  request
more  deeply  rooted  in  pathos  than  in  aberrant  sexuality  and  i  thought  it  might  make  her  suspect  that
something was wrong.


23

i asked my german teacher to add half an hour to each lesson. it seemed more urgent than ever that i
learn  the  language.  his  room  was  cold.  he  wore  foul  weather  gear  and  seemed  gradually  to  be  piling
furniture against the windows.

we  sat  facing  each  other  in  the  gloom.  i  did  wonderfully  well  with  vocabulary  and  rules  of
grammar.  i  could  have  passed  a  written  test  easily,  made  top  grades.  but  i  continued  to  have  trouble
pronouncing  the words. dunlop did not seem to mind. he enunciated  for me over and over, scintillas of
dry spit flying toward my face.

we  advanced  to  three  lessons  a  week.  he  seemed  to  shed  his  distracted  manner,  to  become
slightly  more  engaged.  furniture,  newspapers,  cardboard  boxes,  sheets  of  polyethylene  continued  to
accumulate against the walls and windows--items scavenged from ravines. he stared into my mouth as i
did my exercises in pronunciation. once he reached in with his right hand to adjust my tongue. it was a
strange and terrible moment, an act of haunting intimacy. no one had ever handled my tongue before.

german shepherds still patrolled the town, accompanied by men in mylex suits. we welcomed the
dogs, got used to  them,  fed and petted  them, but did not adjust well  to the sight of costumed men with
padded boots, hoses attached to their masks. we associated these outfits with the source of our trouble
and fear.


sniffed out only a few traces of toxic material on the edge of town."

be billions of dollars in law suits. not to mention demonstrations, panic, violence and social disorder."

at dinner denise said, "why can't they dress in normal clothes?"
"this is what they wear on duty," babette said. "it doesn't mean we're in danger. the dogs have

"that's what we're supposed to believe," heinrich said. "if they released the true findings, there'd

 77

"i  wouldn't  say  they  were  nothing,"  she  said  cautiously.  "they're  small  everyday  seepages.

the two girls looked at heinrich, anticipating a surgically deft rejoinder.
"forget these spills," he said. "these spills are nothing."
this wasn't the direction any of us had expected him to take. babette watched him carefully. he

he seemed to take pleasure in the prospect. babette said, "that's a little extreme, isn't it?"

"what's extreme, what i said or what would happen?"

"both. there's no reason to think the results aren't true as published."

"do you really believe that?" he said.

"why shouldn't i believe it?"

"industry would collapse if the true results of any of these investigations were released."

"what investigations?"

"the ones that are going on all over the country."


"that's the point," she said. "every day on the news there's another toxic spill. cancerous solvents
from storage tanks, arsenic from smokestacks, radioactive water from power plants. how serious can it be
if it happens all the time? isn't the definition of a serious event based on the fact that it's not an everyday
occurrence?"



cut a lettuce leaf on his salad plate into two equal pieces.

they're controllable. but they're not nothing. we have to watch them."
"the sooner we forget these spills, the sooner we can come to grips with the real issue."

"what's the real issue?" i said.

he spoke with his mouth full of lettuce and cucumber.


"the  real  issue  is  the  kind  of  radiation  that  surrounds  us  every  day.  your  radio,  your  tv,  your
microwave oven, your power lines just outside the door, your radar speed-trap on the highway. for years
they told us these low doses weren't dangerous."
"and now?" babette said.


we  watched  him  use  his  spoon  to  mold  the  mashed  potatoes  on  his  plate  into  the  shape  of  a
volcanic  mountain.  he  poured  gravy  ever  so  carefully  into  the  opening  at  the  top.  then  he  set  to  work
ridding  his  steak  of  fat,  veins  and  other  imperfections.  it  occurred  to  me  that  eating  is  the  only  form  of
professionalism most people ever attain.

"this is the big new worry," he said. "forget spills, fallouts, leakages. it's the things right around
you in your own  house  that'll get you sooner or later. it's  the electrical and  magnetic  fields.  who in  this
room would believe me if i said that the suicide rate hits an all-time record among people who live near
high-voltage power lines? what makes these people so sad and depressed? just the sight of ugly wires
and utility poles? or does something happen to their brain cells from being exposed to constant rays?"

he immersed a piece of steak in  the gravy that sat in the volcanic depression, then put it in his
mouth. but he did not begin chewing until he'd scooped some potatoes from the lower slopes and added it
to  the meat.  a  tension seemed to be building around the question of whether he could  finish  the  gravy
before the potatoes collapsed.

"forget headaches and fatigue," he said as he chewed. "what about nerve disorders, strange and
violent  behavior in  the home? there are scientific  findings. where do you think all  the deformed babies
are coming from? radio and tv, that's where."

the girls looked at him. admiringly. i wanted to argue with him. i wanted to ask him why i should
believe  these  scientific  findings  but  not  the  results  that  indicated  we  were  safe  from  nyodene
contamination.  but  what  could  i  say,  considering  my  condition?  i  wanted  to  tell  him  that  statistical
evidence of the kind he was quoting from was by nature inconclusive and misleading. i wanted to say that
he  would  learn  to  regard  all  such  catastrophic  findings  with  equanimity  as  he  matured,  grew  out  of  his
confining literalism, developed a spirit of informed and skeptical inquiry, advanced in wisdom and rounded
judgment, got old, declined, died.

badly they can scare us."

to radio-frequency waves. does anyone at this table know what that means?"
denise looked at her mother.

"is  this  what  they  teach  in  school  today?"  babette  said.  "what  happened  to  civics,  how  a  bill

becomes a law? the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides. i still
remember  my  theorems. the battle of  bunker hill was really  fought on  breed's hill. here's one. latvia,
estonia and lithuania."


but  i  only  said,  "terrifying  data  is  now  an  industry  in  itself.  different  firms  compete  to  see  how

"i've got news for you," he said. "the brain of a white rat releases calcium ions when it's exposed

"was it the monitor or the merrimac that got sunk?" i said.



78

"i don't know but it was tippecanoe and tyler too."
"what was that?" steffie said.
"i  want  to  say  he  was  an  indian  running  for  office.  here's  one.  who  invented  the  mechanical

"i'm  trying  to  remember  the  three  kinds  of  rock,"  i  said.  "igneous,  sedimentary  and  something

"baba," i whispered between her breasts, that night in bed.
although  we  are  for  a  small  town  remarkably  free  of  resentment,  the  absence  of  a  polestar




reaper and how did it change the face of american agriculture?"

else."

"what  about your  logarithms? what about  the causes of  economic discontent leading up to the
great  crash?  here's  one.  who  won  the  lincoln-douglas  debates?  careful.  it's  not  as  obvious  as  it
seems."
"anthracite and bituminous," i said. "isosceles and scalene."

the mysterious words came back to me in a rush of confused schoolroom images.

"here's one. angles, saxons and jutes."


déjà vu was still a problem in the area. a toll-free hotline had been set up. there were counselors
on duty around the clock to talk to people who were troubled by recurring episodes. perhaps déjà vu and
other tics of the mind and body were the durable products of the airborne toxic event. but over a period of
time it became possible to interpret such things as signs of a deep-reaching isolation we were beginning
to  feel.  there  was  no  large  city  with  a  vaster  torment  we  might  use  to  see  our  own  dilemma  in  some
soothing perspective. no large city to blame  for our sense of victimization. no city to  hate and  fear. no
panting  megacenter  to  absorb  our  woe,  to  distract  us  from  our  unremitting  sense  of  time--  time  as  the
agent of our particular ruin, our chromosome breaks, hysterically multiplying tissue.


metropolis leaves us feeling in our private moments a little lonely.


24

it was the following night that i discovered the dylar. an amber bottle of lightweight plastic. it was taped to
the  underside  of  the  radiator  cover  in  the  bathroom.  i  found  it  when  the  radiator  began  knocking  and  i
removed the cover to study the valve in an earnest and methodical way, trying to disguise to myself the
helplessness i felt.
i went at once to find denise.  she was in bed watching tv. when i told her what  i'd found  we

went quietly into the bathroom and looked at the bottle together. it was easy to see the word dylar through
the  transparent tape.  neither of us touched a  thing, so great was  our surprise at finding  the  medication
concealed in this manner. we regarded the little tablets with solemn concern. then we exchanged a look
fraught with implication.

without a word we replaced the radiator cover, bottle intact, and went back to denise's room. the
voice at the end of the bed said: "meanwhile here is a quick and attractive lemon garnish suitable for any
sea food."

were narrowed, her face set in a thoughtful scowl.
"we say nothing to baba."

"all right," i said.

"she'll only say she doesn't remember why she put it there."

"what is dylar? that's what i want to know. there are only three or four places she could have

gone to get the prescription filled, within a reasonable distance. a pharmacist can tell us what the stuff is
for. i'll get in the car first thing in the morning."



back."





supplements, updates."

"i think they're pakistanis."
"whatever."
"what did they tell you about dylar?"
"never heard of it."
"did  you  ask  them  to  look  it  up?  they  must  have  lists  of  the  most  recent  medications.

"i already did that," she said.
"when?"
"around christmas. i went to three drugstores and talked to the indians behind the counters in the

denise sat on the bed, looking past me, past the tv set, past the posters and souvenirs. her eyes

 79

"what problem?"
"memory lapse."
"you  would  call  a  doctor  at  home  to  talk  about  memory  lapse.  if  everyone  with  memory  lapse

"they looked. it's not on any list."

"unlisted," i said.

"we'll have to call her doctor."

"i'll call him now. i'll call him at home."

"surprise him," she said, with a certain ruthlessness.

"if i get him at home, he won't be screened by an answering service, a receptionist, a nurse, the

young  and  good-humored  doctor  who  shares  his  suite  of  offices  and  whose  role  in  life  is  to  treat  the
established doctor's rejects.  once you're shunted from  the older doctor to the younger doctor,  it  means
that you and your disease are second-rate."

"call him at home," she said. "wake him up. trick him into telling us what we want to know."

the only phone was in  the kitchen. i ambled down  the hall, glancing into our bedroom  to  make
sure  babette  was  still  there,  ironing  blouses  and  listening  to  a  call-in  show  on  the  radio,  a  form  of
entertainment she'd recently become addicted to. i went down to the kitchen, found the doctor's name in
the phone book and dialed his home number.
the  doctor's  name  was  hookstratten.  it  sounded  sort  of  german.  i'd  met  him  once--a  stooped

man with a bird-wattled face and deep voice. denise had said to trick him but the only way to do that was
within  a  context  of  honesty  and  truthfulness.  if  i  pretended  to  be  a  stranger  seeking  information  about
dylar, he would either hang up or tell me to come into the office.
he  answered  on  the  fourth  or  fifth  ring.  i  told  him  who  i  was  and  said  i  was  concerned  about

babette. concerned enough to call him at home--an admittedly rash act but one i hoped he'd be able to
understand.  i  said  i  was  fairly  sure  it  was  the  medication  he'd  prescribed  for  her  that  was  causing  the
problem.



called a doctor at home, what would we have? the ripple effect would be tremendous."
i told him the lapses were frequent.

"frequent. i know your wife. this is the wife who came to me one night with a crying child. 'my

child is crying.' she would come to a medical doctor who is a private corporation and ask him to treat a
child for crying. now i pick up the phone and it's the husband. you would call a doctor in his home after
ten o'clock at night. you would say to him, 'memory lapse.' why not tell me she has gas? call me at home
for gas?"






ten at night. why not tell me it is round? this is crucial to our case."
"it's an unlisted drug."

"i never saw it. i certainly never prescribed it for your wife. she's a very healthy woman so far as

it's within my ability to ascertain such things, being subject as i am to the same human failings as the next
fellow."

this  sounded  like  a  malpractice  disclaimer.  maybe  he  was  reading  it  from  a  printed  card  like  a
detective informing a suspect of his constitutional rights. i thanked him, hung up, called my own doctor at
home. he answered on the seventh ring, said he thought dylar was an island in the persian gulf, one of
those oil terminals crucial to the survival of the west. a woman did the weather in the background.

i  went  upstairs  and  told  denise  not  to  worry.  i  would  take  a  tablet  from  the  bottle  and  have  it
analyzed by someone in the chemistry department at the college. i waited for her to tell me she'd already
done  that.  but  she  just  nodded  grimly  and  i  headed  down  the  hall,  stopping  in  heinrich's  room  to  say
goodnight. he was doing chinning exercises in the closet, using a bar clamped to the doorway.




give you some idea."



"frequent and prolonged, doctor. it has to be the medication."
"what medication?"
"dylar."
"never heard of it."
"a small white tablet. comes in an amber bottle."
"you would describe a tablet as small and white and expect a doctor to respond, at home, after

"where did you get that?"
"it's mercator's."
"who's that?"
"he's this senior i hang around with now. he's almost nineteen  and he's still in high school. to

"some idea of what?"
"how big he is. he bench-presses these awesome amounts."



80

"why do you want  to chin?  what does chinning accomplish?" what does anything accomplish?

"every time i see newsfilm of someone in his fourth week of sitting in a cage full of snakes, i find

he was standing in the closet peering out at me. i decided to change the subject.
"if you really think chinning helps, why don't you stand outside the closet and do your exercises


maybe i just want to build up my body to compensate for other things."
"what other things?"

"my hairline's getting worse, to name just one."

"it's not getting worse. ask baba if you don't believe me. she has a sharp eye for things like that."

"my mother told me to see a dermatologist."

"i don't think that's necessary at this stage."

"i already went."

"what did he say?"

"it was a she. my mother told me to go to a woman."

"what did she say?"

"she said i have a dense donor site."

"what does that mean?"


"she can  take hair from other parts of  my head and  surgically implant it where it's needed. not
that it makes any difference. i'd. just as soon be bald. i can easily see myself totally bald. there are kids
my age with cancer. their hair falls out from chemotherapy. why should i be different?"


facing in? why stand in that dark musty space?"
"if you think this is strange, you ought to see what mercator's doing."

"what's he doing?"


"he's training to break the world endurance record for sitting in a cage full of poisonous snakes,
for the guinness book of records. he goes to glassboro three times a week where they have this exotic
pet shop. the owner lets him feed the mamba and the puff adder. to get him accustomed. totally forget
your north american rattlesnake. the puff adder is the most venomous snake in the world."

myself wishing he'd get bitten."

"so do i," heinrich said.
"why is that?"

"he's asking for it."

"that's right. most of us spend our lives avoiding danger. who do these people think they are?"

"they ask for it. let them get it."


i paused a while, savoring the rare moment of agreement.
"what else does your friend do to train?"


"he sits for long periods in one place, getting his bladder accustomed. he's down to two meals a
day.  he  sleeps  sitting  up,  two  hours  at  a  time.  he  wants  to  train  himself  to  wake  up  gradually,  without
sudden movements, which could startle a mamba."




little stimulation."

i  got  out  of  bed  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  went  to  the  small  room  at  the  end  of  the  hall  to
watch steffie and wilder sleep. i remained at this task, motionless, for nearly an hour, feeling refreshed
and expanded in unnameable ways.

i was surprised, entering our bedroom, to find babette standing at a window looking out into the
steely night. she gave no sign that she'd noticed my absence from the bed and did not seem to hear when
i climbed back in, burying myself beneath the covers.


25

our newspaper is delivered by a middle-aged  iranian  driving a nissan sentra. something about the car
makes me uneasy-- the car waiting with its headlights on, at dawn, as the man places the newspaper on
the  front  steps.  i  tell  myself  i  have  reached  an  age,  the  age  of  unreliable  menace.  the  world  is  full  of
abandoned meanings. in the commonplace i find unexpected themes and intensities.


"it seems a strange ambition."
"mambas are sensitive."
"but if it makes him happy."
"he thinks he's happy but it's just a nerve cell in his brain that's getting too much stimulation or too

i sat at my desk in the office staring down at the white tablet. it was more or less flying-saucer-

 81

shaped,  a  streamlined  disk  with  the  tiniest  of  holes  at  one  end.  it  was  only  after  moments  of  intense
scrutiny that i'd been able to spot the hole.

the  tablet  was  not  chalky  like  aspirin  and  not  exactly  capsule-slick  either.  it  felt  strange  in  the
hand,  curiously  sensitive  to  the  touch  but  at  the  same  time  giving  the  impression  that  it  was  synthetic,
insoluble, elaborately engineered.
i walked over to a small domed building known as the observatory and gave the tablet to winnie

richards,  a"  young  research  neurochemist  whose  work  was  said  to  be  brilliant.  she  was  a  tall  gawky
furtive woman who blushed when someone said something funny. some of the new york émigrés liked to
visit her cubicle and deliver rapid-fire one-liners, just to see her face turn red.
i  watched  her  sit  at  the  cluttered  desk  for  two  or  three  minutes,  slowly  rotating  the  tablet  between  her
thumb and index finger. she licked it and shrugged.
"certainly doesn't taste like much."

"how long will it take to analyze the contents?"

"there's a dolphin's brain in my in-box but come see me in forty-eight hours."

winnie  was  well-known  on  the  hill  for  moving  from  place  to  place  without  being  seen.  no  one

knew  how  she  managed  this  or  why  she  found  it  necessary.  maybe  she  was  self-conscious  about  her
awkward  frame,  her  craning  look  and  odd  lope.  maybe  she  had  a  phobia  concerning  open  spaces,
although the spaces at the college were mainly snug and quaint. perhaps the world of people and things
had such an impact on her, struck her with the force of some rough and naked body--made her blush in
fact--that she found it easier to avoid frequent contact. maybe she was tired of being called brilliant. in any
case i had trouble locating her all the rest of that week. she was not to be seen on the lawns and walks,
was absent from her cubicle whenever i looked in.

at  home  denise  made  it  a  point  not  to  bring  up  the  subject  of  dylar.  she  did  not  want  to  put
pressure on me and even avoided eye contact, as if an exchange of significant looks was more than our
secret  knowledge  could  bear.  babette,  for  her  part,  could  not  seem  to  produce  a  look  that  wasn't
significant.  in  the  middle  of  conversations  she  turned  to  gaze  at  snowfalls,  sunsets  or  parked  cars  in  a
sculptured  and  eternal  way.  these  contemplations  began  to  worry  me.  she'd  always  been  an  outward-
looking woman with a bracing sense of particularity, a trust in  the  tangible and real.  this private gazing
was a form of estrangement not only from those of us around her but from the very things she watched so
endlessly.




strange."





things the way you used to."

"that's what their dog does. he stares out of windows. but not just any window. he goes upstairs
to  the attic  and  puts his  paws up on the sill  to  look  out  the highest  window.  they think he's waiting for
instructions."















"denise would kill me if she knew i was going to say this."
"what?"
"i found the dylar."
"what dylar?"
"it was taped to the radiator cover."
"why would i tape something to the radiator cover?"
"that's exactly what denise predicted you would say."
"she's usually right."
"i talked to hookstratten, your doctor."
"i'm in super shape, really."
"that's what he said."
"do you know what these cold gray leaden days make me want to do?"
"what?"
"crawl into bed with a good-looking man. i'll put wilder in his play tunnel. you go shave and brush

we sat at the breakfast table after the older kids were gone.
"have you seen the stovers' new dog?"
"no," i said.
"they  think  it's  a  space  alien.  only  they're  not  joking.  i  was  there  yesterday.  the  animal  is

"has something been bothering you?"
"i'm fine," she said.
"i wish you'd tell me. we tell each other everything. we always have."
"jack, what could be bothering me?"
"you  stare  out  of  windows.  you're  different  somehow.  you  don't  quite  see  things  and  react  to



82

your teeth. meet you in the bedroom in ten minutes."


that afternoon i saw winnie richards slip out a side door of the observatory and go loping down
a  small  lawn  toward  the  new  buildings.  i  hurried  out  of  my  office  and  went  after  her.  she  kept  close  to
walls, moving in a long gaited stride. i felt i had made an important sighting of an endangered animal or
some phenomenal subhuman like a yeti or sasquatch. it was cold and still leaden. i found i could not gain
on  her  without  breaking  into  a  trot.  she  hurried  around  the  back  of  faculty  house  and  i  picked  up  the
pace, fearing i was on the verge of losing her. it felt strange to be running. i hadn't run in many years and
didn't  recognize  my  body  in  this  new  format,  didn't  recognize  the  world  beneath  my  feet,  hard-surfaced
and abrupt. i turned a corner and picked up speed, aware of floating bulk. up, down, life, death. my robe
flew behind me.

i caught up to her in the empty corridor of a one-story building that smelled of embalming fluids.
she  stood  against  the  wall  in  a  pale  green  tunic  and  tennis  sneakers.  i  was  too  winded  to  speak  and
raised my right arm, requesting a delay. winnie led me to a table in a small room full of bottled brains. the
table  was  fitted  with  a  sink  and  covered  with  note  pads  and  lab  instruments.  she  gave  me  water  in  a
paper cup. i tried to dissociate the taste of the tap water from the sight of the brains and the general odor
of preservatives and disinfectants.
"have you been hiding from me?" i said. "i've left notes, phone messages."

"not from you, jack, or anyone in particular."

"then why have you been so hard to find?"

"isn't this what the twentieth century is all about?"

"what?"

"people go into hiding even when no one is looking for them."

"do you really think that's true?"

"it's obvious," she said.

"what about the tablet?"

"an interesting piece of technology. what's it called?"

"dylar."

"never heard of it," she said.

"what can you tell me about it? try not to be too brilliant. i haven't eaten lunch yet."

i watched her blush.


"it's not a tablet in the old sense," she said. "it's a drug delivery system. it doesn't dissolve right
away or release its ingredients right away. the medication in dylar is encased in a polymer membrane.
water from your gastrointestinal tract seeps through the membrane at a carefully controlled rate."
"what does the water do?"


"it dissolves the medication encased in the membrane. slowly, gradually, precisely. the medicine
then  passes  out  of  the  polymer  tablet  through  a  single  small  hole.  once  again  the  rate  is  carefully
controlled."
"it took me a while to spot the hole."

"that's because it's laser-drilled. it's not only tiny but stunningly precise in its dimensions."

"lasers, polymers."

"i'm not an expert in any of this, jack, but i can tell you it's a wonderful little system."

"what's the point of all this precision?"


"i  would  think  the  controlled  dosage  is  meant  to  eliminate  the  hit-or-miss  effect  of  pills  and
capsules. the drug is delivered at specified rates for extended periods. you avoid the classic pattern of
overdosage followed by underdosage. you don't get a burst of medication followed by the merest trickle.
no upset stomach, queasiness, vomiting, muscle cramps, et cetera. this system is efficient."

pumped out of it?"

"it self-destructs. it implodes minutely of its own massive gravitation. we've entered the realm of
physics. once the plastic membrane is reduced to microscopic particles, it passes harmlessly out of the
body in the time-honored way."

chemical components?"





"i don't know," she said.
"of course you know. you're brilliant. everyone says so."
"what else can they say? i do neurochemistry. no one knows what that is."
"other scientists have some idea. they must. and they say you're brilliant."

"i'm impressed. i'm even dazzled. but what happens to the polymer tablet after the medication is

"fantastic.  now  tell  me  what  the  medication  is  designed  to  do?  what  is  dylar?  what  are  the

 83

"but i found it in an ordinary prescription vial."
"i  don't  care  where  you  found  it.  i'm  pretty  sure  i'd  recognize  the  ingredients  of  a  known  brain-

i leaned across my wife's body and turned off the radio. she kept on staring. i kissed her lightly on

"we're  all  brilliant.  isn't  that  the  understanding  around  here?  you  call  me  brilliant,  i  call  you

"no one calls me brilliant. they call me shrewd. they say i latched on to something big. i filled an

"why does this make you proud to be an american?"
"the infant's brain develops in response to stimuli. we still lead the world in stimuli."
i sipped my water.
"i wish i knew more," she said. "but the precise nature of the medication eludes me. i can tell you


brilliant. it's a form of communal ego."

opening no one knew existed."

"there  are  openings  for  brilliance  too.  it's  my  turn,  that's  all.  besides,  i'm  built  funny  and  walk
funny. if they couldn't call me brilliant, they would be forced to say cruel things about me. how awful for
everyone."
she clutched some files to her chest.


"jack,  all  i  can  tell  you  for  certain  is  that  the  substance  contained  in  dylar  is  some  kind  of
psychopharmaceutical.  it's  probably  designed  to  interact  with  a  distant  part  of  the  human  cortex.  look
around  you.  brains  everywhere.  sharks,  whales,  dolphins,  great  apes.  none  of  them  remotely  matches
the human brain in complexity. the human brain is not my field. i have only a bare working knowledge of
the human brain but it's enough to make me proud to be an american. your brain has a trillion neurons
and every neuron has ten thousand little dendrites. the system of intercommunication is awe-inspiring. it's
like a galaxy that you can hold in your hand, only more complex, more mysterious."




one thing. it is not on the market."


receptor drug. this one is unknown."

she began to shoot quick looks toward the door. her eyes were bright and fearful. i realized there
were noises in the corridor. voices, shuffling feet. i watched winnie back toward a rear door. i decided i
wanted  to see her blush one more time.  she put an  arm behind her, unlatched  the door, turned quickly
and went running into the gray afternoon. i tried to think of something funny to say.


26

i sat up in bed with my notes on german grammar. babette lay on her side staring into the clock-radio,
listening to a call-in show. i heard a woman say: "in 1977 i looked in the mirror and saw the person i was
becoming. i couldn't or wouldn't get out of bed. figures moved at the edge of my vision, like with scurrying
steps. i was getting phone calls from a pershing missile base. i needed to talk to others who shared these
experiences. i needed a support program, something to enroll in."

the head.


she looked straight up as i spoke.

"it's time for a major dialogue. you know it, i know it. you'll tell me all about dylar. if not for my
sake,  then  for  your  little  girl's.  she's  been  worried--worried  sick.  besides,  you  have  no  more  room  to
maneuver.  we've  backed  you  against  the  wall.  denise  and  i.  i  found  the  concealed  bottle,  removed  a
tablet, had it analyzed by an expert. those little white disks are superbly engineered. laser technology,
advanced plastics. dylar is almost as ingenious as the microorganisms that ate the billowing cloud. who
would have believed in the existence of a little white pill that works as a pressure pump in the human body
to provide medication safely and effectively, and self-destructs as well? i am struck by the beauty of this.
we know something else, something crucially damaging to your case. we know dylar is not available to
the general public. this fact alone justifies our demands for an explanation. there's really very little left for
you to say. just tell us the nature of the drag. as you well know, i don't have the temperament to hound
people. but denise is a different kind of person. i've been doing all i can to restrain her. if you don't tell me
what  i  want  to  know,  i'll  unleash  your  little  girl.  she'll  come  at  you  with  everything  she  has.  she  won't
waste time trying to make you feel guilty. denise believes in a frontal attack. she'll hammer you right into
the ground. you know i'm right, babette."



"murray says you have important hair."
she smiled in a pale and depleted way. i put down my notes and eased her around slightly so that

about five minutes passed. she lay there, staring into the ceiling.
"just let me tell it in my own way," she said in a small voice.



84

"would you like a liqueur?"
"no, thank you."
"take your time," i said. "we've got all night. if there's anything you want or need, just say so. you

another moment passed.
"i don't know exactly when it started. maybe a year and a half ago. i thought i was going through a

"landmark," i said. "or watershed."
"a  kind  of  settling-in-period,  i  thought.  middle  age.  something  like  that.  the  condition  would  go

"what condition?"
"never mind that for now."
"you've been depressed lately.  i've never seen you like this. this is the whole point of  babette.




have only to ask. i'll be right here for as long as it takes."


phase, some kind of watermark period in my life."


away and i'd forget all about it. but it didn't go away. i began to think it never would."



she's a joyous person. she doesn't succumb to gloom or self-pity."
"let me tell it, jack."

"all right."


"you know how i am. i think everything is correctible. given the right attitude and the proper effort,
a person can change a harmful condition by reducing it to its simplest parts. you can make lists, invent
categories, devise charts and graphs. this is how i am able to teach my students how to stand, sit and
walk, even though i know you think these subjects are too obvious and nebulous and generalized to be
reduced to component parts. i'm not a very ingenious person but i know how to break things down, how to
separate and classify. we can analyze posture, we can analyze eating, drinking and even breathing. how
else do you understand the world, is my way of looking at it."
"i'm right here," i said. "if there's anything you want or need, only say the word."


"when  i  realized  this  condition  was  not  about  to  go  away,  i  set  out  to  understand  it  better  by
reducing it  to its parts. first i had to  find out if it had  any parts. i went to libraries and bookstores, read
magazines and technical journals, watched cable tv, made lists and diagrams, made multicolored charts,
made  phone  calls  to  technical  writers  and  scientists,  talked  to  a  sikh  holy  man  in  iron  city  and  even
studied  the occult, hiding the books in the attic so you and denise wouldn't find them and wonder what
was going on."

and confides."

and my attempts to end it."
"i'll make some hot chocolate. would you like that?"


"stay.  this  is  a  crucial  part.  all  this  energy,  this  research,  study  and  concealment,  but  i  was
getting nowhere. the condition would not yield. it hung over my life, gave me no rest. then one day i was
reading to  mr. treadwell  from  the national  examiner. an ad caught my eye. never mind exactly what it
said. volunteers wanted for secret research. this is all you have to know."

cheekboned, bilingual."

know what that is?"
"no."

"do you know how complex the human brain is?"

"i have some idea."


"no, you don't. let's call the company gray research, although that's not the true name. let's call
my contact mr. gray. mr. gray is a composite. i was eventually in touch with three or four or more people
at the firm."
"one of those long low pale brick buildings with electrified fencing and low-profile shrubbery."


"i  never  saw  their  headquarters.  never  mind  why.  the  point  is  i  took  test  after  test.  emotional,
psychological,  motor  response,  brain  activity.  mr.  gray  said  there  were  three  finalists  and  i  was  one  of
them."
"finalists for what?"


"we  were  to  be  test  subjects  in  the  development  of  a  super  experimental  and  top  secret  drug,
code-name dylar,  that he'd been working  on  for years. he'd  found a dylar receptor  in  the human brain
and  was  putting  the  finishing  touches  on  the  tablet  itself.  but  he  also  told  me  there  were  dangers  in
running tests on a human. i could die. i could live but my brain could die. the left side of my brain could

"all  this without  my knowing.  the whole point  of  babette is  that she speaks to  me, she reveals

"this is not a story about your disappointment at my silence. the theme of this story is my pain

"i  thought  it  was  my  former  wives  who  practiced  guile.  sweet  deceivers.  tense,  breathy,  high-

"i answered the ad and was interviewed by a small firm doing research in psychobiology. do you

 85

"what's so grubby about this?"
"it involved an indiscretion. this was the only way i could get mr. gray to let me use the drug. it

die but the right side could live. this would mean that the left side of my body would live but the right side
would die. there were many grim specters. i could walk sideways but not forward. i could not distinguish
words from things, so that if someone said 'speeding bullet,' i would fall to the floor and take cover. mr.
gray wanted me to know the risks. there were releases and other documents for me to sign. the firm had
lawyers, priests."
"they let you go ahead, a human test animal."


"no, they didn't. they said it was way too risky--legally, ethically and so forth. they went to work
designing  computer  molecules  and  computer  brains.  i  refused  to  accept  this.  i'd  come  so  far,  come  so
close. i want you to try to understand what happened next. if i'm going to tell you the story at all,
i have to include this aspect of it, this grubby little corner of the human heart. you say babette reveals and
confides."
"this is the point of babette."


"good. i will reveal and confide. mr. gray and i made a private arrangement. forget the priests,
the lawyers, the psychobiologists. we would conduct the experiments on our own. i would be cured of my
condition, he would be acclaimed for a wonderful medical breakthrough."


was my last resort, my last hope. first i'd offered him my mind. now i offered my body."
i  felt  a  sensation  of  warmth  creeping  up  my  back  and  radiating  outward  across  my  shoulders.

babette looked straight up. i was propped on an elbow, facing her, studying her features. when i spoke
finally it was in a reason able and inquiring voice--the voice of a man who seeks genuinely to understand
some timeless human riddle.

"how do you offer your body to a composite of three or more people? this is a compound person.
he  is  like  a  police  sketch  of  one  person's  eyebrows,  another  person's  nose.  let's  concentrate  on  the
genitals. how many sets are we talking about?"



the tv up near the ceiling. this is all i remember. grubby, tacky. i was heartsick. but so, so desperate."

"you call this an indiscretion, as if we haven't had a revolution in frank and bold language. call it
what it was, describe it honestly, give it the credit it deserves. you entered a motel room, excited by its
impersonality, the functionalism and bad taste of the furnishings. you walked barefoot on the fire-retardant
carpet.  mr.  gray  went  around  opening  doors,  looking  for  a  full-length  mirror.  he  watched  you  undress.
you lay on the bed, embracing. then he entered you."


dressed, putting the car rental keys on the dresser. the next minute he was inside you."

"no  one  was  inside  anyone.  that  is  stupid  usage.  i  did  what  i  had  to  do.  i  was  remote.  i  was
operating outside myself. it was a capitalist transaction. you cherish the wife who tells you everything. i
am doing my best to be that person.



eyes. i lay back and looked at the ceiling. the radio came on. she began to cry softly.











unfortunately, and after this i don't think there's much chance i'll be able to learn."

laugh or cry. it's for your own good."

"there's some jell-o with banana slices," i said. "steffie made it."
"she's a good girl."
"i can easily get you some."
"no, thank you."
"why did the radio come on?"
"the auto-timer is broken. i'll take it to the shop tomorrow."
"i'll take it."
"it's all right," she said. "it's no trouble. i can easily take it."
"did you enjoy having sex with him?"
"i only remember the tv up near the ceiling, aimed down at us."
"did he have a sense of humor? i know women appreciate men who can joke about sex. i can't,

"all right, i'm only trying to understand. how many times did you go to this motel?"
"more or less on a continuing basis for some months. that was the agreement."
i  felt  heat  rising  along  the  back  of  my  neck.  i  watched  her  carefully.  a  sadness  showed  in  her

"just one person's, jack. a key person, the project manager."
"so we are no longer referring to the mr. gray who is a composite."
"he is now one person. we went to a grubby little motel room. never mind where or when. it had

"don't use that term. you know how i feel about that usage."
"he  effected  what  is  called  entry.  in  other  words  he  inserted  himself.  one  minute  he  was  fully

"it's better if you know him as mr. gray. that's all. he's not tall, short, young or old. he doesn't



86

"i have a question. why didn't gray research run tests on animals? animals must be better than

"you have to tell me, babette. you've taken me this far, put me through this much. i have to know.

"disappointed?"
"you thought the condition would be more specific. i wish it was. but a person doesn't search for

"i'm afraid to die," she said. "i think about it all the time. it won't go away."
"don't tell me this. this is terrible."
"i can't help it. how can i help it?"
"i don't want to know. save it for our old age. you're still young, you get plenty of exercise. this is


computers in some respects."

"that's just the point. no animal has this condition. this is a human condition. animals fear many
things, mr. gray said. but their brains aren't sophisticated enough to accommodate this particular state of
mind."
for  the  first  time  i  began  to  get  an  inkling  of  what  she'd  been  talking  about  all  along.  my  body

went cold. i felt hollow inside. i rose from my supine position, once again propping myself on an elbow to
look down at her. she started to cry again.

what's the condition?"

the longer she wept, the more certain i became that i knew what she was going to say. i felt an
impulse to get dressed and leave, take a room somewhere until this whole thing blew over. babette raised
her  face  to  me,  sorrowing  and  pale,  her  eyes  showing  a  helpless  desolation.  we  faced  each  other,
propped  on  elbows,  like  a  sculpture  of  lounging  philosophers  in  a  classical  academy.  the  radio  turned
itself off.




not a reasonable fear."

"it haunts me, jack. i can't get it off my mind. i know i'm not supposed to experience such a fear
so  consciously  and  so  steadily.  what  can  i  do?  it's  just  there.  that's  why  i  was  so  quick  to  notice  mr.
gray's  ad  in  the  tabloid  i  was  reading  aloud.  the  headline  hit  home.  fear  of  death,  it  said.  i  think
about it all the time. you're disappointed. i can tell."


months and months to corner the solution to some daily little ailment."
i tried to talk her out of it.


"how can you be sure it is death you fear? death is so vague. no one knows what it is, what it
feels  like  or  looks  like.  maybe  you  just  have  a  personal  problem  that  surfaces  in  the  form  of  a  great
universal subject."




hookstratten confirms this, your own doctor. there must be something else, an underlying problem."



condition. there's no one who has lived past the age of seven who hasn't worried about dying."

but i can't be the only one or why would gray research spend millions on a pill?"

"that's what i said.  you're not  the only one. there are hundreds of thousands of people. isn't it
reassuring to know that? you're like the woman on the radio who got phone calls from a missile base. she
wanted to find others whose own psychotic experiences would make her feel less isolated."

that's why he was eager to use me."

thing from a husband and children, maybe it is not so severe."
"this is not the story of a wife's deception. you can't sidestep the true story, jack. it is too big."


i  kept  my  voice  calm.  i  spoke  to  her  as  one  of  those  reclining  philosophers  might  address  a
younger member of the academy, someone whose work is promising and fitfully brilliant but perhaps too
heavily dependent on the scholarship of the senior fellow.
"baba, i am the one in this family who is obsessed by death. i have always been the one."

"you never said."


"to protect you from worry. to keep you animated, vital and happy. you are the happy one. i am
the doomed fool. that's what i can't forgive you for. telling me you're not the woman i believed you were.
i'm hurt, i'm devastated."

"what problem?"
"something you're hiding from yourself. your weight maybe."
"i've lost weight. what about my height?"
"i know you've lost weight. that's just my point. you practically ooze good health. you reek of it.

"what could be more underlying than death?"
i tried to persuade her it was not as serious as she thought.
"baba, everyone fears death. why should you be different? you yourself said earlier it is a human

"at some level everyone fears death. i fear it right up front. i don't know how or why it happened.

"but  mr.  gray  said  i  was  extra  sensitive  to  the  terror  of  death.  he  gave  me  a  battery  of  tests.

"this is what  i find odd.  you concealed your terror  for so long. if you're able  to conceal such a

 87

"i always thought of you as someone who might muse on death. you might take walks and muse.

"the same goes for you. 'as soon as the kids are grown.' you made it sound like a trip to spain."
"i do want to die first," she said, "but that doesn't mean i'm not afraid. i'm terribly afraid. i'm afraid

"what if death is nothing but sound?"
"electrical noise."
"you hear it forever. sound all around. how awful."
"uniform, white."
"sometimes  it sweeps over  me," she said. "sometimes it insinuates itself into  my  mind, little by

"i lie in the dark looking at the clock. always odd numbers. one thirty-seven in the morning. three

"i've been afraid for more than half my life."
"what do you want me to say? your fear is older and wiser than mine?"
"i wake up sweating. i break out in killer sweats."
"i chew gum because my throat constricts."
"i have no body. i'm only a mind or a self, alone in a vast space."
"i seize up," she said.
"i'm too weak to move. i lack all sense of resolve, determination."
"i thought about my mother dying. then she died."
"i think about everyone dying. not just myself. i lapse into terrible reveries."
"i felt so guilty.  i thought her death was connected  to my  thinking about it.  i  feel the same way


but all those times we talked about who will die first, you never said you were afraid."


all the time."










about my own death. the more i think about it, the sooner it will happen."

"how strange it is. we have these deep terrible lingering fears about ourselves and the people we
love. yet we walk around, talk to people, eat and drink. we manage to function. the feelings are deep and
real. shouldn't they paralyze us? how is it we can survive them, at least for a while? we drive a car, we
teach a class. how is it no one sees how deeply afraid we were, last night, this morning? is it something
we  all  hide  from  each  other,  by  mutual  consent?  or  do  we  share  the  same  secret  without  knowing  it?
wear the same disguise."





little. i try to talk to it. not now, death.'"

fifty-nine in the morning."
"death is odd-numbered. that's what the sikh told me. the holy man in iron city."


"you're  my  strength,  my  life-force.  how  can  i  persuade  you  that  this  is  a  terrible  mistake?  i've
watched you bathe wilder, iron my gown. these deep and simple pleasures are lost to me now. don't you
see the enormity of what you've done?"


join in a sexual conspiracy at my expense? all plots move in one direction," i told her grimly.

we  held  each  other  tightly  for  a  long  time,  our  bodies  clenched  in  an  embrace  that  included
elements  of  love,  grief,  tenderness,  sex  and  struggle.  how  subtly  we  shifted  emotions,  found  shadings,
using the scantest movement of our arms, our loins, the slightest intake of breath, to reach agreement on
our fear, to advance our competition, to assert our root desires against the chaos in our souls.


whispers for a while. the radio came on.
"i'm right here," i said. "whatever you want or need, however difficult, tell me and it's done."

"a drink of water."

"of course."

"i'll go with you," she said.

"stay, rest."

"i don't want to be alone."


we put on our robes, went to the bathroom for water. she drank while i pissed. on our way back
to the bedroom i put my arm around her and we walked half toppling toward each other, like adolescents
on a beach. i waited by the side of the bed as she rearranged the sheets neatly, put the pillows in place.
she curled up immediately for sleep but there were still things i wanted to know, things i had to say.





"precisely what was accomplished by the people at gray research?"
"they isolated the fear-of-death part of the brain. dylar speeds relief to that sector."
"incredible."
"it's  not  just  a  powerful  tranquilizer.  the  drug  specifically  interacts  with  neurotransmitters  in  the

"sometimes it hits me like a blow," she said. "i almost physically want to reel."
"is this why i married babette? so she would conceal the truth from me, conceal objects from me,

leaded, unleaded, super unleaded.
we lay naked after love, wet and gleaming. i pulled the covers up over us. we spoke in drowsy



88

"amazing and frightening."
"everything that goes on in your whole life is a result of molecules rushing around somewhere in

"heinrich's brain theories. they're all true. we're the sum of our chemical impulses. don't tell me

brain that are related to the fear of death. every emotion or sensation has its own neurotransmitters. mr.
gray found fear of death and then went to work on finding the chemicals that would induce the brain to
make its own inhibitors."


your brain."

this. it's unbearable to think about."
"they can trace everything you say, do and feel to the number of molecules in a certain region."


"what  happens  to  good  and  evil  in  this  system?  passion,  envy  and  hate?  do  they  become  a
tangle  of  neurons?  are  you  telling  me  that  a  whole  tradition  of  human  failings  is  now  at  an  end,  that
cowardice,  sadism,  molestation  are  meaningless  terms?  are  we  being  asked  to  regard  these  things
nostalgically? what about murderous rage? a murderer used to have a certain fearsome size to him. his
crime was large. what happens when we reduce it  to cells and  molecules?  my son plays chess with a
murderer. he told me all this. i didn't want to listen."
"can i sleep now?"

"wait. if dylar speeds relief, why have you been so sad these past days, staring into space?"

"simple. the drug's not working."

her voice broke when she said these words. she raised the comforter over her head. i could only

stare at the hilly terrain. a man on talk radio said: "i was getting mixed messages about my sexuality." i
stroked her head and body over the quilted bedspread.
"can you elaborate, baba? i'm right here. i want to help."


"mr.  gray  gave  me  sixty  tablets  in  two  bottles.  this  would  be  more  than  enough,  he  said.  one
tablet  every  seventy-two  hours.  the  discharge  of  medication  is  so  gradual  and  precise  that  there's  no
overlapping  from  one  pill  to  the  next.  i  finished  the  first  bottle  sometime  in  late  november,  early
december."













emerge.

i've grown more and more discouraged. let me sleep now, jack."

"remember  we  had  dinner  at  murray's  one  night?  on  the  way  home  we  talked  about  your
memory  lapses.  you  said  you  weren't  sure  whether  or  not  you  were  taking  medication.  you  couldn't
remember, you said. this was a lie, of course."


was a side effect of whatever drug you were taking."

the whole head emerged.

"totally wrong," she said. "it wasn't a side effect of the drug. it was a side effect of the condition.
mr. gray said my loss of memory is a desperate attempt to counteract my fear of death. it's like a war of
neurons. i am able to forget many things but i fail when it comes to death. and now mr. gray has failed as
well."
"does he know that?"

"i left a message on his answering machine."

"what did; he say when he called back?"


"he sent me a tape in the mail, which i took over to the stovers to play. he said he was literally
sorry, whatever that means. he said i was not the right subject after all. he is sure it will work someday,

"denise found it."
"she did?"
"she's been on your trail ever since."
"where did i leave it?"
"in the kitchen trash."
"why did i do that? that was careless."
"what about the second bottle?" i said.
"you found the second bottle."
"i know. i'm asking how many tablets you've taken."
"i've now taken twenty-five from that bottle. that's fifty-five all told. five left."
"four left. i had one analyzed."
"did you tell me that?"
"yes. and has there been any change at all in your condition. she allowed the top of her head to

"i guess so," she said.
"but you weren't lying about memory lapses in general. denise and i assumed your forgetfulness

"at first i thought so. the very beginning was the most hopeful time. since then no improvement.

 89

"so -we are no longer talking about fear and floating terror," i said. "this is the hard and heavy

i  told  him  i  was  still  afraid.  he  smiled  broadly,  waiting  for  the  punch  line.  i  shook  his  hand  and

soon, with someone, somewhere. he said he  made a mistake with  me.  it was too random. he was  too
eager."

it was the middle of the night. we were both exhausted. but we'd come so far, said so much, that
i knew we couldn't stop  just yet. i took a deep breath. then  i lay  back, staring into  the ceiling.  babette
leaned across my body to turn off the lamp. then she pressed a button on the radio, killing the voices. a
thousand other nights had ended more or less like this. i felt her sink into the bed.
"there's something i promised myself i wouldn't tell you."

"can it wait until morning?" she said.

"i'm tentatively scheduled to die. it won't happen tomorrow or the next day. but it is in the works."


i went on to tell her  about  my exposure  to nyodene  d., speaking  matter-of-factly,  tonelessly, in
short declarative sentences. i told her about the computer technician, the way he'd tapped into my history
to produce a pessimistic massive tally. we are the sum total of our data, i told her, just as we are the sum
total  of  our  chemical  impulses.  i  tried  to  explain  how  hard  i'd  struggled  to  keep  the  news  from  her.  but
after her own revelations, this seemed the wrong kind of secret to be keeping.

thing, the fact itself."

slowly  she  emerged  from  beneath  the  covers.  she  climbed  on  top  of  me,  sobbing.  i  felt  her
fingers  clawing  at  my  shoulders  and  neck.  the  warm  tears  fell  on  my  lips.  she  beat  me  on  the  chest,
seized my left hand and bit the flesh between the thumb and index  finger. her sobs became a grunting
sound, full of terrible desperate effort. she took my head in her hands, gently and yet fiercely, and rocked
it to and fro on the pillow, an act i could not connect to anything she'd ever done, anything she seemed to
be.

later, after she'd fallen off my body and into a restless sleep, i kept on staring into the dark. the
radio came on. i threw off the covers and went into the bathroom. denise's scenic paperweights sat on a
dusty shelf by the door. i ran water over my hands and wrists. i splashed cold water on my face. the only
towel  around  was  a  small  pink  handcloth  with  a  tic-tac-toe  design.  i  dried  myself  slowly  and  carefully.
then i tilted the radiator cover away from the wall and stuck my hand underneath. the bottle of dylar was
gone.


27

i had my second medical checkup since the toxic event. no startling numbers on the printout. this death
was still too deep to be glimpsed. my doctor,  sundar  chakravarty, asked me about  the sudden  flurry of
checkups. in the past i'd always been afraid to know.

headed out the door.

on the way home i drove down elm intending to make a quick stop at the supermarket. the street
was full of emergency vehicles. farther down i saw bodies scattered about. a man with an armband blew
a. whistle at me and stepped in front of my car. i glimpsed other men in mylex suits. stretcher-bearers ran
across the street. when the man with the whistle drew closer, i was able to make out the letters on his
armband: simuvac.


spill. get your timing down."
"move it out, get it out. you're in the exposure swath."

"what's that mean?"

"it means you're dead," he told me.


i backed out of the street and parked the car. then i walked slowly back down elm, trying to look
as though i belonged. i kept close to storefronts, mingled with technicians and marshals, with uniformed
personnel. there were buses, police cars, ambulettes. people with electronic equipment appeared to be
trying to detect radiation or toxic fallout. in time i approached the volunteer victims. there were twenty or
so, prone, supine, draped over curbstones, sitting in the street with woozy looks.

i was startled to see my daughter among them. she lay in the middle of the street, on her back,
one  arm  flung  out,  her  head  tilted  the  other  way.  i  could  hardly  bear  to  look.  is  this  how  she  thinks  of
herself at the age of nine--already a victim, trying to polish her skills? how natural she looked, how deeply
imbued with the idea of a sweeping disaster. is this the future she envisions?

"back it out," he said. "street's closed."
"are you people sure you're ready for a simulation? you may want to wait for one more massive



90

i went back to the sidewalk. a man's amplified voice boomed across the street from somewhere

i walked over there and squatted down.

"steffie? is that you?"

she opened her eyes.

"you're not supposed to be here unless you're a victim," she said.

"i just want to be sure you're okay."

"i'll get in trouble if they see you."

"it's cold. you'll get sick. does baba know you're here?"

"i signed up in school an hour ago."

"they at least should hand out blankets," i said.


she closed her eyes. i spoke to her a while longer but she wouldn't answer. there was no trace of
irritation  or  dismissal  in  her  silence.  just  conscientiousness.  she  had  a  history  of  being  devout  in  her
victimhood.

inside the supermarket.
"i want to welcome all of you on behalf of advanced disaster management, a private consulting

firm that conceives and operates simulated evacuations. we are interfacing with twenty-two state bodies
in carrying out this advanced disaster drill. the first, i trust, of many. the more we rehearse disaster, the
safer we'll be from the real thing. life seems to work that way, doesn't it? you take your umbrella to the
office  seventeen  straight  days,  not  a  drop  of  rain.  the  first  day  you  leave  it  at  home,  record-breaking
downpour. never fails, does it? this is the mechanism we hope to employ, among others. o-right, on to
business.  when  the siren sounds  three  long  blasts,  thousands of hand-picked evacuees  will  leave  their
homes and places of employment, get into their vehicles and head for well-equipped emergency shelters.
traffic  directors  will  race  to  their  computerized  stations.  updated  instructions  will  be  issued  on  the
simuvac  broadcast  system.  air-sampling  people  will  deploy  along  the  cloud  exposure  swath.  dairy
samplers will test milk and randomized foodstuffs over the next three days along the ingestion swath. we
are not simulating a particular spillage today.  this is  an all-purpose leak  or spill.  it could  be radioactive
steam, chemical cloudlets, a haze of unknown origin. the important thing is movement. get those people
out of the swath. we learned a lot during the night of the billowing cloud. but there is no substitute for a
planned  simulation.  if  reality  intrudes  in  the  form  of  a  car  crash  or  a  victim  falling  off  a  stretcher,  it  is
important to remember that we are not here to mend broken bones or put out real fires. we are here to
simulate. interruptions can cost lives in a real emergency. if we learn to work around interruptions now,
we'll be able  to work around them later when it counts. o-right. when the siren sounds  two melancholy
wails, street captains will make house-to-house searches for those who may have been inadvertently left
behind.  birds,  goldfish,  elderly  people,  handicapped  people,  invalids,  shut-ins,  whatever.  five  minutes,
victims. all you rescue personnel, remember this is not a blast simulation. your victims are overcome but
not traumatized. save your tender loving care for the nuclear fireball in june. we're at four minutes and
counting. victims, go limp. and remember you're not h
ere to scream or thrash about. we like a low-profile victim. this isn't new  york or l. a. soft moans will
suffice."

i decided i didn't want to watch. i went back to the car and headed home. the sirens emitted the
first  three  blasts  as  i  pulled  up  in  front  of  the  house.  heinrich  was  sitting  on  the  front  steps,  wearing  a
reflector vest and his camouflage cap.  with him was  an older boy. he had a powerful compact body of
uncertain pigmentation. no one on our street seemed to be evacuating. heinrich consulted a clipboard.












likely it is to actually happen."



"what's going on?"
"i'm a street captain," he said.
"did you know steffie was a victim?"
"she said she might be."
"why didn't you tell me?"
"so they pick her up and put her in an ambulance. what's the problem?"
"i don't know what the problem is."
"if she wants to do it, she should do it."
"she seems so well-adjusted to the role."
"it could save her life someday," he said.
"how can pretending to be injured or dead save a person's life?"
"if she does it now, she might not have to do it later. the more you practice something, the less

"that's what the consultant said."
"it's a gimmick but it works."

 91

"who's this?"
"this is orest mercator. he's going to help me check for leftovers."
"you're the one who wants to sit in a cage full of deadly snakes. can you tell me why?"
"because i'm going for the record," orest said.
"why would you want to get killed going for a record?"
"what killed? who said anything about killed?"
"you'll be surrounded by rare and deadly reptiles."
"they're the best at what they do. i want to be the best at what i do."
"what do you do?"
"i sit in a cage for sixty-seven days. that's what it takes to break the record."
"do you understand that you are risking death for a couple of lines in a paperback book?"
he  looked  searchingly  at  heinrich,  obviously  holding  the  boy  responsible  for  this  idiotic  line  of













questioning.
"they will bite you," i went on.

"they won't bite me."

"how do you know?"

"because i know."

"these are real snakes, orest. one bite, that's it."

"one bite if they bite. but they won't bite."

"they are real. you are real. people get bitten all the time. the venom is deadly."

"people get bitten. but i won't."


i found myself saying, "you will, you will. these snakes don't know you find death inconceivable.
they don't know you're young and strong and you think death applies to everyone but you. they will bite
and you will die."

i paused, shamed by the passion of my argument. i was surprised to see him look at me with a
certain interest, a certain grudging respect. perhaps the unbecoming force of my outburst brought home
to him the gravity of his task, filled him with intimations of an unwieldy fate.

quickest. a puff adder bites me, i die in seconds."

than snakes."

what kind of name is orest? i studied his features. he might have been hispanic, middle eastern,
central asian, a dark-skinned eastern european, a light-skinned black. did he have an accent? i wasn't
sure. was he a samoan, a native north american, a sephardic jew? it was getting hard to know what you
couldn't say to people.





like."

heinrich  grinned  like  a  stool  pigeon  in  the  movies.  the  siren  began  to  sound--two  melancholy
blasts. i went inside as the two boys checked the clipboard for house numbers. babette was in the kitchen
giving wilder some lunch.
"he's wearing a reflector vest," i said.

"it's in case there's haze, he won't get hit by fleeing vehicles."

"i don't think anyone's bothered to flee. how do you feel?"

"better," she said.

"so do i."

"i think it's being with wilder that picks me up."


"i know what you  mean.  i always feel good when  i'm with wilder. is  it because  pleasures  don't
cling to him? he is selfish without being grasping, selfish in a totally unbounded and natural way. there's
something wonderful about the way he drops one thing, grabs for another. i get annoyed when the other
kids don't fully appreciate special moments or occasions. they let things slide away that should be kept
and savored. but when wilder does it, i see the spirit of genius at work."

grander, that i can't quite put my finger on."

"remind me to ask murray," i said.

he said to me, "how many pounds can you bench-press?"
"i don't know. not very many."
"did you ever punch somebody in the face?"
"maybe a glancing blow, once, a long time ago."
"i'm looking to punch somebody in the face. bare-fisted. hard as i can. to find out what it feels

"they want to bite, they bite," he said. "at least i go right away. these snakes are the best, the

"what's your hurry? you're nineteen years old. you'll find hundreds of ways to die that are better

"that  may  be  true  but  there's  something  else  about  him  that  gives  me  a  lift.  something  bigger,



92

she spooned soup into the child's mouth, creating facial expressions for him to mimic and saying,

"you haven't been pretested," she said. "even one pill can be dangerous to ingest."
"i don't want to ingest."
"yes, you do."
"we are being coaxed out of the ingestion swath. where is mr. gray? i may want to sue him as a

"are you telling me they're not behind the radiator cover?"
"that's right."
"i didn't move them, honest."
"is it possible you threw them away in an angry or depressed moment? i only want them for the


"yes yes yes yes yes yes yes."
"one thing i have to ask. where is the dylar?"

"forget it, jack. fool's gold or whatever the appropriate term."


"a cruel illusion. i know. but i'd like to keep the tablets in a safe place, if only as physical evidence
that dylar exists. if your left brain should decide to die, i want to be able to sue someone. there are four
tablets left. where are they?"




sake of historical accuracy. like white house tapes. they go into the archives."




matter of principle."
"we made a pact, he and i."

"tuesdays and fridays. the grayview motel."


"that's  not  what  i  mean.  i  promised  not  to  reveal  his  true  identity  to  anyone.  considering  what
you're  after,  that  promise  goes  double.  it's  more  for  your  good  than  his.  i'm  not  telling,  jack.  let's  just
resume our lives. let's tell each other we'll do the best we can. yes yes yes yes yes."

i drove to the grade school and parked across the street from the main entrance. twenty minutes
later  they  came  surging  out,  about  three  hundred  kids,  babbling,  gleeful,  casually  amuck.  they  called
brilliant insults, informed and spacious obscenities, hit each other with book bags, knit caps. i sat in the
driver's seat scanning the mass of faces, feeling like a dope dealer or pervert.

when i spotted denise i blew the horn and she came over. this was the first time i'd ever picked
her up at school and she gave me a wary and hard-eyed look as she passed in front of the car-- a look
that indicated she was in no mood for news of a separation or divorce. i took the river road home. she
scrutinized my profile.

just the opposite. she takes dylar to improve her memory."



out you can't get it with a prescription. because i talked to her doctor and he never heard of it."











whatever your reason for holding the bottle, it's just not valid anymore."

reached into my jacket for the dark glasses and put them on.
"then i'll throw it away," she said.


over  the  next  few  days  i  tried  an  assortment  of  arguments,  some  nearly  breathtaking  in  their
delicate webby texture. i even enlisted babette, convincing her that the bottle belonged in adult hands. but
the  girl's  will  was  supremely  resistant.  her  life  as  a  legal  entity  had  been  shaped  by  other  people's
bargaining and haggling and she was determined to follow a code too rigid to allow for the trade-off, the
settlement. she would keep the object hidden until we told her its secret.

it was probably just as well. the drug could be dangerous, after all. and i was not a believer in
easy  solutions,  something  to  swallow  that  would  rid  my  soul  of  an  ancient  fear.  but  i  could  not  help

"you called him at home?"
"at the office."
"dylar is a little too special for a g. p."
"is my mother a drug addict?"
"you're smarter than that," i said.
"no, i'm not."
"we'd like to know what you did with the bottle. there were some tablets left."
"how do you know i took them?"
"i know it, you know it.
"if somebody wants to tell me what dylar really is, maybe we'll get somewhere."
"there's  something  you  don't  know,"  i  said.  "your  mother  no  longer  takes  the  medication.

"it's about dylar," i said. "the medication has nothing to do with baba's memory problems. in fact

"i don't believe you."
"why not?"
"because you wouldn't come and get me at school just to tell me that. because we already found

we'd looped around to the west and were now driving through the college campus. automatically i

 93

technology with a human face.

thinking about that saucer-shaped tablet. would it ever work, could it work for some but not others? it was
the  benign  counterpart  of  the  nyodene  menace.  tumbling  from  the  back  of  my  tongue  down  into  my
stomach.  the  drug  core  dissolving,  releasing  benevolent  chemicals  into  my  bloodstream,  flooding  the
fear-of-death  part  of  my  brain.  the  pill  itself  silently  self-destructing  in  a  tiny  inward  burst,  a  polymer
implosion, discreet and precise and considerate.



28

wilder  sat  on  a  tall  stool  in  front  of  the  stove,  watching  water  boil  in  a  small  enamel  pot.  he  seemed
fascinated by the process. i wondered if he'd uncovered some splendid connection between things he'd
always thought of as separate. the kitchen is routinely rich in such moments, perhaps for me as much as
for him.

steffie walked in saying, "i'm the only person i know who likes wednesdays." wilder's absorption
seemed  to  interest  her.  she  went  and  stood  next  to  him,  trying  to  figure  out  what  attracted  him  to  the
agitated water. she leaned over the pot, looking for an egg.
a jingle for a product called ray-ban wayfarer began running through my head.

"how did the evacuation go?"

"a lot of people never showed up. we waited around, moaning."

"they show up for the real ones," i said.

"then it's too late."


the  light  was  bright  and  cool,  making  objects  glow.  steffie  was  dressed  for  the  outdoors,  a
schoolday morning, but remained at the stove, looking from wilder to the pot and back, trying to intersect
the lines of his curiosity and wonder.
"baba says you got a letter."

"my mother wants me to visit at easter."


"good. do you want to  go? of course you do.  you like your mother.  she's in mexico city now,
isn't she?"


the time. you like bee."

the  enormity  of  the  mission,  of  flying  to  a  foreign  country  at  nearly  supersonic  speed,  at  thirty
thousand feet, alone, in a humped container of titanium and steel, caused her to grow momentarily silent.
we watched the water boil.
"i signed up to be a victim again. it's just before easter. so i think i have to stay here."

"another evacuation? what's the occasion this time?"

"a funny smell."

"you mean some chemical from a plant across the river?"

"i guess so."

"what do you do as the victim of a smell?"

"they have to tell us yet."

"i'm sure they won't mind excusing you just this once. i'll write a note," i said.


my first and fourth marriages were to dana breedlove, who is steffie's mother. the first marriage
worked well enough to encourage us to try again as soon as it became mutually convenient. when we did,
after the melancholy epochs of janet savory and tweedy browner, things proceeded to fall apart. but not
before stephanie rose was conceived, a star-hung night in barbados. dana was there to bribe an official.

she told me very little about her intelligence work. i knew she reviewed fiction for the cia, mainly
long serious novels with coded structures. the work left her tired and irritable, rarely able to enjoy food,
sex or conversation. she spoke spanish to someone on the telephone, was a hyperactive mother, shining
with an eerie stormlight intensity. the long novels kept arriving in the mail.

it was curious how i kept stumbling into the company of lives in intelligence. dana worked part-
time  as  a  spy.  tweedy  came  from  a  distinguished  old  family  that  had  a  long  tradition  of  spying  and
counterspying  and  she  was  now  married  to  a  high-level  jungle  operative.  janet,  before  retiring  to  the
ashram,  was  a  foreign-currency  analyst  who  did  research  for  a  secret  group  of  advanced  theorists
connected to some controversial think-tank. all she told me is that they never met in the same place twice.

some of my adoration of babette must have been sheer relief. she was not a keeper of secrets,

"who'll take me?"
"i'll take you to the airport. your mother will pick you up at the other end. it's easy. bee does it all



94

lasher wadded up a paper napkin and tossed it at someone two tables away. then he stared at

"did  you  ever  spit  in  your  soda  bottle  so  you  wouldn't  have  to  share  your  drink  with  the  other

at least  not until  her death  fears  drove her  into a  frenzy of clandestine research and  erotic deception.  i
thought of mr. gray and his pendulous member. the image was hazy, unfinished. the man was literally
gray, giving off a visual buzz.

the  water  progressed  to  a  rolling  boil.  steffie  helped  the  boy  down  from  his  perch.  i  ran  into
6abette  on  my way to the  front door. we exchanged  the simple but  deeply sincere question we'd been
asking each other two or three times a day since the night of the dylar revelations. "how do you feel?" as
king the question, hearing it asked, made us both feel better. i bounded upstairs to find my glasses.
the national cancer quiz was on tv.


in the lunchroom in centenary hall, i watched murray sniff his utensils. there was a special pallor
in  the  faces  of  the  new  york  émigrés.  lasher  and  grappa  in  particular.  they  had  the  wanness  of
obsession, of powerful appetites confined to small spaces. murray said that elliot lasher had a film noir
face. his features were sharply defined, his hair perfumed with some oily extract. i had the curious thought
that  these  men  were  nostalgic  for  black-and-white,  their  longings  dominated  by  achromatic  values,
personal extremes of postwar urban gray.
alfonse  stompanato sat down, radiating aggression and threat. he seemed to be watching  me,

one department head measuring the aura of another. there was a brooklyn dodger emblem sewed to the
front of his gown.

grappa.
"who was the greatest influence on your life?" he said in a hostile tone.


"richard  widmark  in  kiss  of  death.  when  richard  widmark  pushed  that  old  lady  in  that
wheelchair down that flight of stairs, it was like a personal breakthrough for me. it resolved a number of
conflicts.  i  copied  richard  widmark's  sadistic  laugh  and  used  it  for  ten  years.  it  got  me  through  some
tough  emotional  periods.  richard  widmark  as  tommy  udo  in  henry  hathaway's  kiss  of  death.
remember  that  creepy  laugh?  hyena-faced.  a  ghoulish  titter.  it  clarified  a  number  of  things  in  my  life.
helped me become a person."

kids?"

"it was an automatic thing. some guys even spit in their sandwiches. after we pitched pennies to
the wall, we'd  buy stuff to eat and drink. there was  always a flurry of spitting. guys spit on their  fudge
pops, their charlotte russes."

"how old were you when you first realized your father was a jerk?"

"twelve and a  half," grappa said. "i was sitting in the balcony at  the loew's fairmont watching
fritz lang's clash by night with barbara stanwyck as mae doyle, paul douglas as jerry d'amato and the
great robert ryan as earl pfeiffer. featuring j. carroll naish, keith andes and the early marilyn monroe.
shot in thirty-two days. black and white."

your teeth?"
"more times than i can count."

"when you bite dead skin off your thumb, do you eat it or spit it out?"

"chew it briefly, then propel it swiftly from the end of the tongue."

"do you ever close your eyes," lasher said, "while you're driving on a highway?"


"i  closed  my  eyes  on  95  north  for  eight  full  seconds.  eight  seconds  is  my  personal  best.  i've
closed my eyes for up to six seconds on winding country roads but that's only doing thirty or thirty-five. on
multilane highways i usually hover at seventy before i close my eyes. you do this on straightaways. i've
closed my eyes for up to five seconds on straightaways driving with other people in the car. you wait till
they're drowsy is how you do it."

watched him light up a cigarette, shake out the match and toss it into murray's salad.
"how much pleasure did you take as a kid," lasher said, "in imagining yourself dead?"


"never mind as a kid," grappa said. "i still do it all the time. whenever i'm upset over something, i
imagine  all  my  friends,  relatives  and  colleagues  gathered  at  my  bier.  they  are  very,  very  sorry  they
weren't nicer to me while i lived. self-pity is something i've worked very hard to maintain. why abandon it
just because you grow up?  self-pity is something that children are very good  at, which must  mean it is
natural and important. imagining yourself dead is the cheapest, sleaziest, most satisfying form of childish
self-pity. how sad and remorseful and guilty all  those people are, standing by your great bronze coffin.
they  can't  even  look  each  other  in  the  eye  because  they  know  that  the  death  of  this  decent  and
compassionate man is the result of a conspiracy they all took part in. the coffin is banked with flowers and

grappa  had  a  round  moist  worried  face.  there  was  something  in  it  of  a  sweet  boy  betrayed.  i

"did you ever get an erection from a dental hygienist rubbing against your arm while she cleaned

 95

i watched alfonse reassert his bearish presence with  a shoulder-rolling gesture. i  took this as a

"how do you listen to that?" i said. "death and disease. do they talk like that all the time?"
"when  i covered sports,  i used  to get together with  the other writers on  the road. hotel rooms,

lined with a napped fabric in salmon or peach. what wonderful cross-currents of self-pity and self-esteem
you are able to wallow in, seeing yourself laid out in a dark suit and tie, looking tanned, fit and rested, as
they say of presidents after vacations. but there is something even more childish and satisfying than self-
pity, something that explains why i try to see myself dead on a regular basis, a great fellow surrounded by
sniveling mourners. it is my way of punishing people for thinking their own lives are more important than
mine."
lasher said to murray, "we ought to have an official day of the dead. like the mexicans."

"we do. it's called super bowl week."


i didn't want to listen to this. i had my own dying to dwell upon, independent of fantasies. not that i
thought grappa's remarks were ill-founded. his sense of conspiracy aroused in me a particular ripple of
response. this is what we forgive on our deathbeds, not lovelessness or greed. we forgive them for their
ability to put themselves at a distance, to scheme in silence against us, do us, effectively, in.

sign that he was wanning up to speak. i wanted to bolt, make off suddenly, run.
"in new  york," he said, looking directly  at me, "people ask if you have a good  internist.  this is

where true power lies. the inner organs. liver, kidneys, stomach, intestines, pancreas. internal medicine
is  the  magic  brew.  you  acquire  strength  and  charisma  from  a  good  internist  totally  aside  from  the
treatment he provides. people ask about tax lawyers, estate planners, dope dealers. but it's the internist
who really  matters. 'who's your internist?' someone will say in a challenging  tone. the  question implies
that  if  your  internist's  name  is  unfamiliar,  you  are  certain  to  die  of  a  mushroom-shaped  tumor  on  your
pancreas. you are meant to feel inferior and doomed not just because your inner organs may be trickling
blood but because you don't know who to see about it, how to make contacts, how to make your way in
the world. never mind the military-industrial complex. the real power is wielded every day, in these little
challenges and intimidations, by people just like us."

i gulped down my dessert and slipped away from the table. outside i waited for murray. when he
emerged i held his arm just-above the elbow and we walked across campus like a pair of european senior
citizens, heads bowed in conversation.


planes, taxis, restaurants. there was only one topic of conversation. sex and death."

"that's two topics."

"you're right, jack."

"i would hate to believe they are inextricably linked."

"it's just that on the road everything is linked. everything and nothing, to be precise."

we walked past small mounds of melting snow.

"how is your car crash seminar progressing?"

"we've  looked  at  hundreds  of  crash  sequences.  cars  with  cars.  cars  with  trucks.  trucks  with
buses. motorcycles with cars. cars with helicopters. trucks with trucks. my students think these movies
are prophetic. they mark the suicide wish of technology.
the drive to suicide, the hurtling rush to suicide."


"what do you say to them?"

"these are  mainly  b-movies, tv  movies, rural drive-in movies. i  tell my students not to look  for
apocalypse in such places. i see these car crashes as part of a long tradition of american optimism. they
are positive events, full of the old 'can-do' spirit. each car crash is meant to be better than the last. there
is a constant  upgrading of  tools and skills, a  meeting  of challenges.  a director says, 'i need this flatbed
truck to do a midair double somersault that produces an orange ball of fire with a thirty-six-foot diameter,
which the cinematographer will use to light the scene.' i tell my students if they want to bring technology
into  it,  they  have  to  take  this  into  account,  this  tendency  toward  grandiose  deeds,  toward  pursuing  a
dream."


sheer waste, the sense of a civilization in a state of decay?"
"what about it?" i said.

"i tell them it's not decay they are seeing but innocence. the movie breaks away from complicated

human  passions  to  show  us  something  elemental,  something  fiery  and  loud  and  head-on.  it's  a
conservative wish-fulfillment, a yearning for naïveté. we want to be artless again. we want to reverse the
flow of experience, of worldliness and its responsibilities. my students say, 'look at  the crushed bodies,
the severed limbs. what kind of innocence is this?'"

"a dream? how do your students reply?"
"just the way you did. 'a dream?' all that blood and glass, that screeching rubber. what about the



96

"look past the violence."
"exactly. look past the violence, jack. there is a wonderful brimming spirit of innocence and fun."

"what do you say to that?"

"i  tell  them  they  can't  think  of  a  car  crash  in  a  movie  as  a  violent  act.  it's  a  celebration.  a

reaffirmation of traditional values and beliefs. i connect car crashes to holidays like thanksgiving and the
fourth.  we  don't  mourn  the  dead  or  rejoice  in  miracles.  these  are  days  of  secular  optimism,  of  self-
celebration. we will improve, prosper, perfect ourselves. watch any car crash in any american movie. it is
a  high-spirited  moment  like  old-fashioned  stunt  flying,  walking  on  wings.  the  people  who  stage  these
crashes are able to capture a lightheartedness, a carefree enjoyment that car crashes in foreign movies
can never approach."




29

babette and i moved down the wide aisle, each with a gleaming cart. we passed a family shopping in sign
language. i kept seeing colored lights.
"how do you feel?" she said.

"i'm fine. i feel good. how are you?"


"why don't you have a checkup? wouldn't you feel better if you found out nothing was there?"
"i've had two checkups. nothing is there."

"what did dr. chakravarty say?"

"what could he say?"

"he speaks english beautifully. i love to hear him speak."


"not as much as he loves to speak."

"what  do  you  mean  he  loves  to  speak?  do  you  mean  he  takes  every  possible  opportunity  to
speak? he's a doctor. he has to speak. in a very real sense you are paying him to speak. do you mean
he flaunts his beautiful english? he rubs your face in it?"
"we need some class plus."

"don't leave me alone," she said.

"i'm just going to aisle five."

"i don't want to be alone, jack. i believe you know that."

"we're  going  to  come  through  this  thing  all  right,"  i  said.  "maybe  stronger  than  ever.  we're

determined to be well. babette is not a neurotic person. she is strong, healthy, outgoing, affirmative. she
says yes to things. this is the point of babette."

we stayed together in the aisles and at the checkout. babette bought three tabloids for her next
session with old man treadwell. we read them together as we waited on line. then we went together to
the car, loaded the merchandise, sat very close to each other as i drove home.











reason not to tamper."

the déjà vu crisis centers closed down. the hotline was quietly discontinued. people seemed on
the verge of forgetting. i could hardly blame them even if i felt abandoned to a certain extent, left holding
the bag.

i  went  faithfully  to  german  lessons.  i  began  to  work  with  my  teacher  on  things  i  might  say  in
welcoming  delegates  to  the  hitler  conference,  still  a  number  of  weeks  off.  the  windows  were  totally
blocked by furniture and debris. howard dunlop sat in the middle of the room, his oval face floating in sixty
watts of dusty light. i began to suspect i was the only person he ever talked to. i also began to suspect he
needed me more than i needed him. a disconcerting and terrible thought.

"except for my eyes," i said.
"what do you mean?"
"chakravarty thinks i ought to see an eye man."
"is it the colored spots again?"
"yes."
"stop wearing those dark glasses."
"i can't teach hitler without them."
"why not?"
"i need them, that's all."
"they're stupid, they're useless."
"i've built a career," i said. "i may not understand all the elements involved but this is all the more

 97


black in a thick heavy ominous typeface: das aegyptische todtenbuch.
"what's that?" i said.

"the egyptian book of the dead," he whispered. "a best-seller in germany."


every so often, when denise wasn't home, i wandered into her room. i picked up things, put them
down, looked behind a curtain, glanced into an open drawer, stuck my foot under the bed and felt around.
absentminded browsing.
babette listened to talk radio.


i started throwing things away. things in the top and bottom of my closet, things in boxes in the
basement and attic.  i  threw away correspondence,  old paperbacks, magazines  i'd  been saving  to read,
pencils that needed sharpening. i threw away tennis shoes, sweat socks, gloves with ragged fingers, old
belts and neckties. i came upon stacks of student reports, broken rods for the seats of director's chairs. i
threw these away. i threw away every aerosol can that didn't have a top.
the gas meter made a particular noise.

that night on tv i saw newsfilm of policemen carrying a body bag out of someone's backyard in

bakersville. the reporter said two bodies had been found, more were believed buried in the same yard.
perhaps  many  more.  perhaps  twenty  bodies,  thirty  bodies--  no  one  knew  for  sure.  he  swept  an  arm
across the area. it was a big backyard.
the reporter was a middle-aged man who spoke clearly and strongly and yet with some degree of

intimacy, conveying a sense of frequent contact with  his audience, of shared interests and mutual  trust.
digging would continue through the night, he said, and the station would cut back to the scene as soon as
developments warranted. he made it sound like a lover's promise.

three nights later i wandered into heinrich's room, where the tv set was temporarily located. he
sat  on  the  floor  in  a  hooded  sweatshirt,  watching  live  coverage  of  the  same  scene.  the  backyard  was
floodlit,  men  with  picks  and  shovels  worked  amid  mounds  of  dirt.  in  the  foreground  stood  the  reporter,
bareheaded,  in  a  sheepskin  coat,  in  a  light  snow,  giving  an  update.  the  police  said  they  had  solid
information,  the  diggers  were  methodical  and  skilled,  the  work  had  been  going  on  for  over  seventy-two
hours. but no more bodies had been found.

the  sense  of  failed  expectations  was  total.  a  sadness  and  emptiness  hungover  the  scene.  a
dejection, a sorry gloom. we felt it ourselves, my son and i, quietly watching. it was in the room, seeping
into the air from pulsing streams of electrons. the reporter seemed at first merely apologetic. but as he
continued to discuss the absense of mass graves, he grew increasingly forlorn, gesturing at the diggers,
shaking  his  head,  almost  ready  to  plead  with  us  for  sympathy  and  understanding.  i  tried  not  to  feel
disappointed.


30

in  the  dark  the  mind  runs  on  like  a  devouring  machine,  the  only  thing  awake  in  the  universe.  i  tried  to
make  out  the  walls,  the  dresser  in  the  corner.  it  was  the  old  defenseless  feeling.  small,  weak,
deathbound, alone. panic, the god of woods and wilderness, half goat. i moved my head to the right,
remembering the clock-radio.  i watched  the numbers change,  the progression  of digital  minutes, odd to
even. they glowed green in the dark.

contented air. a mixture of forgetfulness and sleep. where am i, who are you, what was i dreaming?
"we have to talk," i said.


she mumbled things, seemed to fend off some hovering presence. when i reached for the lamp,
she gave me a backhand punch in the arm. the light went on. she retreated toward the radio, covering
her head and moaning.

real name of gray research."
all she could do was moan, "no."


"i'm reasonable about this. i have a sense of perspective. no huge hopes or expectations. i only
want to check it out, give it a try. i don't believe in magical objects. i only say, 'let me try, let me see.' i've
been lying here for hours practically paralyzed. i'm drenched in sweat. feel my chest, babette."



"you can't get away. there are things we have to talk about. i want access to mr. gray. i want the

after a while i woke up babette. warm air came rising from her body as she shifted toward me.

there  was  a  german-language  book  on  a  ruined  table  near  the  door.  the  title  was  lettered  in

"five more minutes. i need to sleep."
"feel. give me your hand. see how wet."



98

"don't tell me you sweat. what is sweat? i gave the man my word."
in the  morning we sat at the kitchen  table. the clothes dryer was running in the entranceway. i

"we all sweat," she said. "what is sweat?"
"there are rivulets here."
"you want to ingest. no good, jack."
"all i ask is a few minutes alone with mr. gray, to find out if i qualify."
"he'll think you want to kill him."
"but that's crazy. i'd be crazy. how can i kill him?"
"he'll know i told you about the motel."
"the motel is over and done. i can't change the motel. do i kill the only man who can relieve my









pain? feel under my arms if you don't believe me."
"he'll think you're a husband with a grudge."


"the motel is frankly small grief. do i kill him and feel better? he doesn't have to know who i am. i
make up an identity, i invent a context. help me, please."


listened to the tapping sound of buttons and zippers as they struck the surface of the drum.

"i already know what i want to say to him. i'll be descriptive, clinical. no philosophy or theology. i'll
appeal to the pragmatist in him. he's bound to be impressed by the fact that i'm actually scheduled to die.
this is frankly more than you could claim. my need is intense. i believe he'll respond to this. besides, he'll
want another crack at a live subject. that's the way these people are."
"how do i know you won't kill him?"

"you're my wife. am i a killer?"


"you're a man, jack. we all know about men and their insane rage. this is something men are
very good at. insane and violent jealousy. homicidal rage. when people are good at something, it's only
natural that they look for a chance to do this thing. if i were good at it, i would do it. it happens i'm not. so
instead of going into homicidal rages, i read to the blind. in other words i know my limits. i am willing to
settle for less."
"what did i do to deserve this? this is not like you. sarcastic, mocking."

"leave it alone," she said. "dylar was my mistake. i won't let you make it yours as well."


we  listened  to  the  tap  and  scratch  of  buttons  and  zipper  tabs.  it  was  time  for  me  to  leave  for
school. the voice upstairs remarked: "a california think-tank says the next world war may be fought over
salt."

all afternoon i stood by the window in my office, watching the observatory. it was growing dark
when  winnie  richards  appeared  at  the  side  door,  looked  both  ways,  then  began  moving  in  a  wolf-trot
along the sloping turf. i hurried out of my office and down the stairs. in seconds i was out on a cobbled
path,  running.  almost  at  once  i  experienced  a  strange  elation,  the  kind  of  bracing  thrill  that  marks  the
recovery of a lost pleasure. i saw her turn a corner in a controlled skid before she disappeared behind a
maintenance building. i ran as fast as i could, cutting loose, cutting into the wind, running chest out, head
high,  my  arms  pumping  hard.  she  reappeared  at  the  edge  of  the  library,  an  alert  and  stealthy  figure
moving beneath the arched windows, nearly lost to the dusk. when she drew near the steps she suddenly
accelerated, going full tilt from what was almost a standing start. this was a deft and lovely maneuver that
i was able to appreciate even as it put me at a disadvantage. i decided to cut behind the library and pick
her  up  on  the  long  straight  approach  to  the  chemistry  labs.  briefly  i  ran  alongside  the  members  of  the
lacrosse  team  as  they  charged  off  a  field  after  practice.  we  ran  step  for  step,  the  players  waving  their
sticks  in  a  ritualized  manner  and  chanting  something  i  couldn't  understand.  when  i  reached  the  broad
path i was gasping for breath. winnie was nowhere in sight. i ran through the faculty parking lot, past the
starkly modern chapel, around the administration building. the wind was audible now, creaking in the high
bare branches. i ran to the east, changed my mind, stood looking around, removed my glasses to peer. i
wanted to run, i was willing to run. i would run as far as i could, run through the night, run to forget why i
was running. after some moments i saw a figure loping up a hill at the edge of the campus. it had to be
her.  i  started  running  again,  knowing  she  was  too  far  away,  would  disappear  over  the  crest  of  the  hill,
would not resurface for weeks. i put everything i had into a final climbing burst, charging over concrete,
grass,  then  gravel,  lungs  burning  in  my  chest,  a  heaviness  in  my  legs  that  seemed  the  very  pull  of  the
earth, its most intimate and telling judgment, the law of falling bodies.
how surprised i was, nearing the top of the hill, to see that she had stopped. she wore a gore-

tex jacket puffed up with insulation and she was looking to the west. i walked slowly toward her. when i
cleared  a  row  of  private  homes  i  saw  what  it  was  that  had  made  her  pause.  the  edge  of  the  earth
trembled  in  a  darkish  haze.  upon  it  lay  the  sun,  going  down  like  a  ship  in  a  burning  sea.  another
postmodern sunset, rich in romantic imagery. why try to describe it? it's enough to say that everything in

 99

"remember the saucer-shaped pill?"
"of course," she said. "a super piece of engineering."
"i found out what it's designed to do. it's designed to solve an ancient problem. fear of death. it

"i hope not," she said. "i'd miss them."
"could be the toxic residue in the atmosphere is diminishing."
"there's a school of thought that says it's not residue from the cloud that causes the sunsets. it's

we stood  there watching a surge of florid light, like a heart pumping in a documentary on color

"but we still die."
"everyone dies, yes."
"we just won't be afraid," she said.
"that's right."
"interesting, i guess."
"dylar  was  designed  by  a  secret  research  group.  i  believe  some  of  these  people  are

"hi, jack. i didn't know you came up here."
"i usually go to the highway overpass."
"isn't this something?"
"it's beautiful all right."
"makes me think. it really does."
"what do you think about?"
"what can you think about in the face of this kind of beauty? i get scared, i know that."
"this isn't one of the scarier ones."
"it scares me. boy, look at it."
"did  you  see  last  tuesday?  a  powerful  and  stunning  sunset.  i  rate  this  one  average.  maybe

our field of vision seemed  to exist in order to gather the light of this event. not that this was one of the
stronger sunsets. there had been more dynamic colors, a deeper sense of narrative sweep.










they're beginning to wind down."



residue from the microorganisms that ate the cloud."

tv.



encourages the brain to produce fear-of-death inhibitors."






psychobiologists. i wonder if you've heard rumors of a group working secretly on fear of death."

important."


base?"

what a psychobiologist is."
"it's a catchall sort of thing. interdisciplinary. the real work is in the pits."

"isn't there anything you can tell me?"


something in my voice made her turn to look at me. winnie was barely in to her thirties but she
had a sane and practiced eye for the half-concealed disasters that constitute a life. a narrow face partly
hidden by wispy brown ringlets, eyes bright and excited. she had the beaky and hollow-boned look of a
great  wading  creature.  small  prim  mouth.  a  smile  that  was  permanently  in  conflict  with  some  inner
stricture  against  the  seductiveness  of  humor.  murray  told  me  once  he  had  a  crush  on  her,  found  her
physical awkwardness a sign of an intelligence developing almost too rapidly, and i thought i knew what
he meant. she was poking and snatching at the world around, overrunning it at times.

"i don't know what your personal involvement is with this substance," she said, "but i think it's a
mistake to lose one's sense of death, even one's fear of death. isn't death the boundary we need? doesn't
it give a precious texture to life, a sense of definition? you have to ask yourself whether anything you do in
this life would have beauty and meaning without the knowledge you carry of a final line, a border or limit."
i watch light climb into the rounded summits of high-altitude clouds. clorets, velamints, freedent.


"people  think  i'm  spacey,"  she  said.  "i  have  a  spacey  theory  about  human  fear,  sure  enough.
picture  yourself,  jack,  a  confirmed  homebody,  a  sedentary  fellow  who  finds  himself  walking  in  a  deep
wood. you spot something out of the corner of your eye. before you know anything else, you know that
this  thing is very large and that it has  no place in your ordinary  frame of reference.  a flaw in  the world
picture. either it shouldn't be here or you shouldn't. now the thing comes into full view. it is a grizzly bear,
enormous,  shiny  brown,  swaggering,  dripping  slime  from  its  bared  fangs.  jack,  you  have  never  seen  a
large animal in  the wild.  the sight  of  this grizzer is so electrifyingly strange that it gives you a renewed

"i'd be the last to hear. no one can ever find me. when they do find me, it's to tell me something

"what could be more important?"
"you're talking about gossip, rumors. this is thin stuff, jack. who are these people, where is their

"that's why i've been chasing you. i thought you'd know something about them. i don't even know



100

"fear is self-awareness raised to a higher level."
"that's right, jack."
"and death?" i said.
"self,  self,  self.  if  death  can  be  seen  as  less  strange  and  unreferenced,  your  sense  of  self  in

"what do i do to make death less strange? how do i go about it?"
"i don't know."
"do i risk death by driving fast around curves? am i supposed to go rock climbing on weekends?"
"i don't know," she said. "i wish i knew."
"do  i  scale  the  sheer  facade  of  a  ninety-story  building,  wearing  a  clip-on  belt?  what  do  i  do,

"i'm  still  sad,  winnie,  but  you've  given  my  sadness  a  richness  and  depth  it  has  never  known

she turned away, blushing.
i said, "you're more than a fair-weather friend--you're a true enemy."
she turned exceedingly red.
i said, "brilliant people never think of the lives they smash, being brilliant."
i watched her blush. she used both hands to pull her knit cap down over her ears. we took a last

sense of yourself, a fresh awareness of the self--the self in terms of a unique and horrific situation. you
see  yourself  in  a  new  and  intense  way.  you  rediscover  yourself.  you  are  lit  up  for  your  own  imminent
dismemberment.  the  beast  on  hind  legs  has  enabled  you  to  see  who  you  are  as  if  for  the  first  time,
outside  familiar  surroundings,  alone,  distinct,  whole.  the  name  we  give  to  this  complicated  process  is
fear."




relation to death will diminish, and so will your fear."





winnie? do i sit in a cage full of african snakes like my son's best friend? this is what people do today."
"i think what you do, jack, is forget the medicine in that tablet. there is no medicine, obviously."


she was right. they were all right. go on with my life, raise my kids, teach my students. try not to
think of that staticky figure in the grayview motel putting his unfinished hands on my wife.

before."





look at the sky and started walking down the hill.


31

did  you  remember:  1)  to  make  out  your  check  to  waveform  dynamics?  2)  to  write  your  account
number  on  your  check?  3)  to  sign  your  check?  4)  to  send  payment  in  full,  as  we  do  not  accept  partial
payment?  5)  to  enclose  your  original  payment  document,  not  a  reproduced  copy?  6)  to  enclose  your
document in such a way that the address appears in the window? 7) to detach the green portion of your
document along the dotted line to retain for your records? 8) to supply your correct address and zip code?
9)  to  inform  us  at  least  three  weeks  before  you  plan  to  move?  10)  to  secure  the  envelope  flap?  11)  to
place  a  stamp  on  the  envelope,  as  the  post  office  will  not  deliver  without  postage?  12)  to  mail  the
envelope at least three days before the date entered in the blue box?
cable health, cable weather, cable news, cable nature.


no one wanted to cook that night. we all got in the car and went out to the commercial strip in the
no man's land beyond the town boundary. the never-ending neon. i pulled in at a place that specialized in
chicken  parts  and  brownies.  we  decided  to  eat  in  the  car.  the  car  was  sufficient  for  our  needs.  we
wanted to eat, not look around at other people. we wanted to fill our stomachs and get it over with. we
didn't need light and space. we certainly didn't need to face each other across a table as we ate, building
a  subtle  and  complex  cross-network  of  signals  and  codes.  we  were  content  to  eat  facing  in  the  same
direction, looking only inches past our hands. there was a kind of rigor in this. denise brought the food
out to the car and distributed paper napkins. we settled in to eat. we ate fully dressed, in hats and heavy
coats, without speaking, ripping into chicken parts with our hands and teeth. there was a mood of intense
concentration,  minds  converging  on  a  single  compelling  idea.  i  was  surprised  to  find  i  was  enormously
hungry. i chewed and ate, looking only inches past my hands. this is how hunger shrinks the world. this
is  the  edge  of  the  observable  universe  of  food.  steffie  tore  off  the  crisp  skin  of  a  breast  and  gave  it  to
heinrich. she never ate the skin. babette sucked a bone. heinrich traded wings with denise, a large for a
small. he thought small wings were tastier. people gave babette their bones to clean and suck. i fought
off an image of mr. cray lazing naked on a motel bed, an unresolved picture collapsing at the edges. we
sent  denise  to  get  more  food,  waiting  for  her  in  silence.  then  we  started  in  again,  half  stunned  by  the

 101

steffie said in a small voice, "how cold is space?"
we all waited once more. then heinrich said, "it depends on how high you go. the higher you go,

"wait a minute," babette said. "the higher you go, the closer you get to the sun. so the warmer it

steffie said quietly, "how do astronauts float?"
there was a pause like a missing tick in eternity.
denise stopped eating to say, 'they're lighter than air."
we all stopped eating. a worried silence ensued.
"there is no air," heinrich said finally. "they can't be lighter than something that isn't there. space

"what makes you think the sun is high?"
"how can the sun be low? you have to look up to see the sun."
"what about at night?" he said.
"it's on the other side of the earth. but people still look up."
"the whole point of sir albert einstein," he said, "is how can the sun be up if you're standing on

dimensions of our pleasure.





is a vacuum except for heavy molecules."

or cold? air, or so i thought. if there's no air, there should be no cold. like a nothing kind of day."
"how can there be nothing?" denise said. "there has to be something."

'there is something," heinrich said in exasperation. 'there's heavy molecules."

"do-i-need-a-sweater kind of day," babette said.


there  was  another  pause.  we  waited  to  learn  if  the  dialogue  was  over.  then  we  set  to  eating
again. we traded unwanted parts in silence, stuck our hands in cartons of rippled  fries. wilder liked  the
soft  white  fries  and  people  picked  these  out  and  gave  them  to  him.  denise  distributed  ketchup  in  little
watery pouches. the interior of the car smelled of grease and licked flesh. we traded parts and gnawed.


the colder it gets."

gets."





the sun?"




come shooting off the surface of giant stars."



night on the weather network."
"i thought corolla was a car," steffie said.


"everything's  a  car,"  heinrich  said.  "the  thing  you  have  to  understand  about  giant  stars  is  that
they  have  actual  nuclear  explosions  deep  inside  the  core.  totally  forget  these  russian  ibms  that  are
supposed to be so awesome. we're talking about a hundred million times bigger explosions."

and chew a single mouthful of food.



by influencing the weather."
"the weather's been normal."

"for this time of year," denise put in smartly.


this  was  the  week  a  policeman  saw  a  body  thrown  from  a  ufo.  it  happened  while  he  was  on
routine  patrol  on  the  outskirts  of  classboro.  the  rain-soaked  corpse  of  an  unidentified  male  was  found
later  that  night,  fully  clothed.  an  autopsy  disclosed  that  death  was  due  to  multiple  fractures  and  heart
failure--the result, perhaps, of a ghastly shock. under hypnosis, the policeman, jerry tee walker, relived
in detail the baffling sight of the neon-bright object that resembled an enormous spinning top as it hovered
eighty feet above a field. officer walker, a vietnam vet, said the bizarre scene reminded him of helicopter
crews  throwing  vietcong  suspects  out  the  door.  incredibly,  as  he  watched  a  hatch  come  open  and  the
body plummet to the ground, walker sensed an eerie message being psychically transmitted to his brain.
police hypnotists plan to intensify their sessions in an attempt to uncover the message.


"the sun is a great molten ball," she said. "it's impossible to stand on the sun."
"he was just saying 'if.' basically there is no up or down, hot or cold, day or night."
"what is there?"
"heavy molecules. the whole point of space is to give molecules a chance to cool down after they

"if there's no hot or cold, how can molecules cool down?"
"hot and cold are words. think of them as words. we have to use words. we can't just grunt."
"it's called the sun's corolla," denise said to steffie in a separate discussion. "we saw it the other

there was a long pause. no one spoke. we went back to eating for as long as it took to bite off

"it's supposed to be russian psychics who are causing this crazy weather," babette said.
"what crazy weather?" i said.
heinrich said, "we have psychics, they have psychics, supposedly. they want to disrupt our crops

"i thought space was cold," babette said. "if there's no air, how can it be cold? what makes warm

there  were  sightings  all  over  the  area.  an  energizing  mental  current,  a  snaky  glow,  seemed  to



102

pass  from  town  to  town.  it  didn't  matter  whether  you  believed  in  these  things  or  not.  they  were  an
excitement, a wave, a tremor. some voice or noise would crack across the sky and we would be lifted out
of death. people drove speculatively to the edges of towns, where some would turn back, some decide to
venture  toward  remoter  areas  which  seemed  in  these  past  days  to  exist  under  a  spell,  a  hallowed
expectation. the air grew soft and mild. a neighbor's dog barked through the night.
in  the  fast  food  parking  lot  we  ate  our  brownies.  crumbs  stuck  to  the  heels  of  our  hands.  we

inhaled  the  crumbs,  we  licked  the  fingers.  as  we  got  close  to  finishing,  the  physical  extent  of  our
awareness began to expand. food's borders yielded to the wider world. we looked past our hands. we
looked through the windows, at the cars and lights. we looked at the people leaving the restaurant, men,
women and children carrying cartons of food, leaning into the wind. an impatience began to flow from the
three bodies in  the rear seat.  they wanted to be home, not here. they wanted to blink an eye and find
themselves in their rooms, with their things, not sitting in a cramped car on this windswept concrete plain.
journeys home were always a test. i started up the car, knowing it was only a matter of seconds before
the  massed  restlessness  took  on  elements  of  threat.  we  could  feel  it  coming,  babette  and  i.  a  sulky
menace  brewed  back  there.  they  would  attack  us,  using  the  classic  strategy  of  fighting  among
themselves. but attack us for what reason? for not getting them home faster? for being older and bigger
and  somewhat  steadier  of  mood  than  they  were?  would  they  attack  us  for  our  status  as  protectors--
protectors  who  must  sooner  or  later  fail?  or  was  it  simply  who  we  were  that  they  attacked,  our  voices,
features, gestures, ways of walking and laughing, our eye color, hair color, skin tone, our chromosomes
and cells?

as  if  to  head  them  off,  as  if  she  could  not  bear  the  implications  of  their  threat,  babette  said
pleasantly, "why is it these ufos are  mostly seen upstate? the best sightings are upstate. people get
abducted and taken aboard. fanners see burn  marks where saucers landed.  a woman gives birth  to  a
ufo baby, so she says. always upstate."
"that's where the mountains are," denise said. "spaceships can hide from radar or whatever."

"why are the mountains upstate?" steffie said.


"mountains  are  always  upstate,"  denise  told  her.  "this  way  the  snow  melts  as  planned  in  the
spring and flows downhill to the reservoirs near the cities, which are kept in the lower end of the state for
exactly this reason."

i thought, momentarily, she might be right. it made a curious kind of sense. or did it? or was it
totally crazy? there had to be large cities in the northern part of some states. or were they just north of
the border in the southern part of states just to the north? what she s. aid could not be true and yet i had
trouble,  momentarily, disproving  it.  i could not name  cities or mountains  to disprove it. there had to be
mountains in the southern part of some states. or did they tend to be below the state line, in the northern
part of states to the south? i tried to name state capitals, governors. how could there be a north below a
south? is this what i found confusing? was this the crux of denise's error? or was she somehow, eerily,
right?
the radio said: "excesses of salt, phosphorus, magnesium."


later that night babette and i sat drinking cocoa. on the kitchen table, among the coupons, the
foot-long supermarket receipts, the mail-order catalogs, was a postcard from mary alice, my oldest. she is
the  golden  issue  of  my  first  marriage  to  dana  breedlove,  the  spy,  and  is  therefore  steffie's  full  sister,
although ten years and two marriages fell between. mary alice is nineteen now and lives in hawaii, where
she works with whales.


frequency tapes of mouse cries to destroy tumors in the human body. do you believe that?"







the world. jack not to die first. and wilder to stay the way he is forever."


32

"yes."
"so do i."
she put down the newspaper. after a while she said to me urgently, "how do you feel, jack?"
"i'm all right. i feel fine. honest. what about you?"
"i wish i hadn't told you about my condition."
"why?"
"then you wouldn't have told me you're going to die first. here are the two things i want most in

babette picked up a tabloid someone had left on the table.
"mouse  cries  have  been  measured  at  forty  thousand  cycles  per  second.  surgeons  use  high-

 103

"your german is coming around?"
"i still speak it badly. the words give me trouble. howard and i are working on opening remarks

"you call him howard?"
"not to his face. i don't call him anything to his face and he doesn't call me anything to my face.

"and a way of looking over a person's shoulder."
"you see all this in fleeting glimpses. remarkable. what else?" i demanded.
"and a rigid carriage that seems at odds with his shuffling walk."
"yes, he walks without moving his arms. what else, what else?"
"and something else, something above and beyond all this, something eerie and terrible."
"exactly. but what is it? something i can't quite identify."
"there's a strange air about him, a certain mood, a sense, a presence, an emanation."
"but what?" i said, surprised to find myself deeply and personally concerned, colored dots dancing

you live under the same roof, after all."
"fleeting glimpses. the other boarders seem to prefer it that way. he barely exists, we feel."
"there's something about him. i'm not sure what it is exactly."
"he's flesh-colored," murray said.
"true. but that's not what makes me uneasy."
"soft hands."
"is that it?"
"soft hands in a man give me pause. soft skin in general. baby skin. i don't think he shaves."
"what else?" i said.
"flecks of dry spittle at the corners of his mouth."
"you're  right,"  i  said  excitedly.  "dry  spit.  i  feel  it  hit  me  in  the  face  when  he  leans  forward  to


murray and i walked across campus in our european manner, a serenely reflective pace, heads lowered
as  we  conversed.  sometimes  one  of  us  gripped  the  other  near  the  elbow,  a  gesture  of  intimacy  and
physical  support.  other  times  we  walked  slightly  apart,  murray's  hands  clasped  behind  his  back,
gladney's folded monkishly at the abdomen, a somewhat worried touch.


for the conference."


it's that kind of relationship. do you see him at all?











articulate. what else?"








at the edge of my vision.

we'd  walked  thirty  paces  when  murray  began  to  nod.  i  watched  his  face  as  we  walked.  he
nodded crossing the street and kept nodding all the way past the music library. i walked with him step for
step, clutching his elbow, watching his face, waiting for him to speak, not interested in the fact that he'd
taken me completely out of my way, and he was still nodding as we approached the entrance to wilmot
grange, a restored nineteenth-century building at the edge of the campus.


in my ear, "he looks like a man who finds dead bodies erotic."
i went to one last lesson. the walls and windows were obscured by accumulated objects, which

seemed now to be edging toward the middle of the room. the bland-faced man before me closed his eyes
and spoke, reciting useful tourist phrases. "where am i?"
"can you help me?"


"it is night and i am lost." i could hardly bear to sit there. murray's remark fixed him forever to a
plausible identity. what had been elusive about howard dunlop was now pinned down. what had been
strange  and  half  creepy  was  now  diseased.  a  grim  lasciviousness  escaped  his  body  and  seemed  to
circulate through the barricaded room.

in truth  i would  miss  the lessons. i would also  miss the dogs,  the german shepherds. one day
they were simply gone. needed elsewhere perhaps or sent back to the desert to sharpen their skills. the
men in mylex suits were still around, however, carrying instruments to measure and probe, riding through
town in teams of six or eight in chunky peglike vehicles that resembled lego toys.

thousand-dollar nabisco dinah shore."

this  was  the  night  the  insane  asylum  burned  down.  heinrich  and  i  got  in  the  car  and  went  to
watch. there were other  men at  the scene with  their  adolescent boys.  evidently  fathers and sons seek
fellowship  at  such  events.  fires  help  draw  them  closer,  provide  a  conversational  wedge.  there  is
equipment to appraise, the technique of firemen to discuss and criticize. the manliness of firefighting--the

"but what?" i said. "but what?"
it wasn't until four days later that he called me at home, at one in the morning, to whisper helpfully

i  stood  by  wilder's  bed  watching  him  sleep.  the  voice  next  door  said:  "in  the  four-hundred-



104

"most  of  these  fires  in  old  buildings  start  in  the  electrical  wiring,"  heinrich  said.  "faulty  wiring.

virility  of  fires,  one  might  say--suits  the  kind  of  laconic  dialogue  that  fathers  and  sons  can  undertake
without awkwardness or embarrassment.

that's one phrase you can't hang around for long without hearing."
"most people don't burn to death," i said. 'they die of smoke inhalation."

"that's the other phrase," he said.


flames  roared  through  the  dormers.  we  stood  across  the  street  watching  part  of  the  roof  give
way,  a  tall  chimney  slowly  fold  and  sink.  pumper  trucks  kept  arriving  from  other  towns,  the  men
descending heavily in their rubber boots and old-fashioned hats. hoses were manned and trained, a figure
rose above the shimmering roof in the grip of a telescopic ladder. we watched the portico begin to go, a
far  column  leaning.  a  woman  in  a  fiery  nightgown  walked  across  the  lawn.  we  gasped,  almost  in
appreciation. she was white-haired and slight, fringed in burning air, and we could see she was mad, so
lost to dreams and furies that the fire around her head seemed almost incidental. no one said a word. in
all the heat and noise of detonating wood, she brought a silence to her. how powerful and real. how deep
a thing was madness.  a fire captain hurried  toward her, then circled out slightly, disconcerted, as if she
were  not  the  person,  after  all,  he  had  expected  to  meet  here.  she  went  down  in  a  white  burst,  like  a
teacup breaking. four men were around her now, batting at the flames with helmets and caps.

the great work of containing the blaze went on, a labor that seemed as old and lost as cathedral-
building,  the  men  driven  by  a  spirit  of  lofty  communal  craft.  a  dalmatian  sat  in  the  cab  of  a  hook-and-
ladder truck.
"it's funny how you can look at it and look at it," heinrich said. "just like a fire in a fireplace."

"are you saying the two kinds of fire are equally compelling?"

"i'm just saying you can look and look."

"'man has always been fascinated by fire.' is that what you're saying?"

"this is my first burning building. give me a chance," he said.


the  fathers  and  sons  crowded  the  sidewalk,  pointing  at  one  or  another  part  of  the  half  gutted
structure.  murray,  whose  rooming  house  was  just  yards  away,  sidled  up  to  us  and  shook  our  hands
without a word. windows blew out. we watched another chimney slip through the roof, a few loose bricks
tumbling to the lawn. murray shook our hands again, then disappeared.

soon  there  was  a  smell  of  acrid  matter.  it  could  have  been  insulation  burning--polystyrene
sheathing for pipes and wires-- or one or more of a dozen other substances. a sharp and bitter stink filled
the  air,  overpowering  the  odor  of  smoke  and  charred  stone.  it  changed  the  mood  of  the  people  on  the
sidewalk.  some  put  hankies  to  their  faces,  others  left  abruptly  in  disgust.  whatever  caused  the  odor,  i
sensed  that  it  made  people  feel  betrayed.  an  ancient,  spacious  and  terrible  drama  was  being
compromised  by  something  unnatural,  some  small  and  nasty  intrusion.  our  eyes  began  to  burn.  the
crowd broke up. it was as though we'd been forced to recognize the existence of a second kind of death.
one was real, the other synthetic. the odor drove us away but beneath it and far worse was the sense
that death came two ways, sometimes at once, and how death entered your mouth and nose, how death
smelled, could somehow make a difference to your soul.

we hurried to our cars, thinking of the homeless, the mad, the dead, but also of ourselves now.
this  is  what  the  odor  of  that  burning  material  did.  it  complicated  our  sadness,  brought  us  closer  to  the
secret of our own eventual end.

at home i fixed warm milk for us both. i was surprised to see him drink it. he gripped the mug with
both  hands,  talked  about  the  noise  of  the  conflagration,  the  air-fed  wallop  of  combustion,  like  a  ramjet
thrusting. i almost expected him to thank me for the nice fire. we sat there drinking our milk. after a while
he went into his closet to chin.

i  sat  up  late  thinking  of  mr.  gray.  gray-bodied,  staticky,  unfinished.  the  picture  wobbled  and
rolled,  the edges of his body flared with random distortion. lately i'd found myself thinking of him often.
sometimes  as  mr.  gray  the  composite.  four  or  more  grayish  figures  engaged  in  a  pioneering  work.
scientists, visionaries. their wavy bodies passing through each other,  mingling, blending, fusing.  a little
like extraterrestrials. smarter than the rest of us, selfless, sexless, determined to engineer us out of our
fear. but when the bodies fused 1 was left with a single figure, the project manager, a hazy gray seducer
moving  in  ripples  across  a  motel  room.  bedward,  plotward.  i  saw  my  wife  reclining  on  her  side,
voluptuously rounded, the eternal waiting nude. i saw her as he did. dependent, submissive, emotionally
captive. i felt his mastery and control. the dominance of his position. he was taking over my mind, this
man i'd never seen, this half image, the barest smidge of brainlight. his bleak hands enfolded a rose-white
breast.  how  vivid  and  living  it  was,  what  a  tactile  delight,  dusted  with  russet  freckles  about  the  tip.  i
experienced aural torment. heard them in their purling foreplay, the love babble and buzzing flesh. heard

 105

panasonic.

the  sloppings  and  smackings,  the  swash  of  wet  mouths,  bedsprings  sinking  in.  an  interval  of  mumbled
adjustments. then gloom moved in around the gray-sheeted bed, a circle slowly closing.



33

what  time  was  it  when  i  opened  my  eyes,  sensing  someone  or  something  nearby?  was  it  an  odd-
numbered hour? the room was soft and webby. i stretched my legs, blinked- slowly focused on a familiar
object.  it  was wilder, standing two feet from  the bed, gazing  into  my face.  we spent  a long  moment in
mutual contemplation. his great round head, set as it was on a small-limbed and squattish body, gave him
the look of a primitive clay figurine, some household idol of obscure and cultic derivation. i had the feeling
he wanted to show me something. as i slipped quietly out of bed, he walked in his quilted booties out of
the  room.  i  followed  him  into  the  hall  and  toward  the  window  that  looks  out  on  our  backyard.  i  was
barefoot and robeless and felt a chill pass through the hong kong polyester of my pajamas. wilder stood
looking  out  the  window,  his  chin  about  an  inch  above  the  sill.  it  seemed  i'd  spent  my  life  in  lopsided
pajamas,  the  shirt  buttons  inserted  in  mismatching  slits,  the  fly  undone  and  drooping.  was  it  dawn
already? were those crows i heard screaming in the trees?
there  was  someone  sitting  in  the  backyard.  a  white-haired  man  sitting  erect  in  the  old  wicker

chair, a figure of eerie stillness and composure. at first, dazed and sleepy, i didn't know what to make of
the  sight.  it  seemed  to  need  a  more  careful  interpretation  than  i  was  able  to  provide  at  the  moment.  i
thought one thing, that he'd been inserted there for some purpose. then fear began to enter, palpable and
overwhelming, a fist clenching repeatedly in my chest. who was he, what was happening here? i realized
wilder was no longer next to me. i reached the doorway to his room just in time to see his head sink into
the pillow. by the time i got to the bed, he was fast asleep. i didn't know what to do. i felt cold, white. i
worked my way back to the window, gripping a doorknob, a handrail, as if to remind myself of the nature
and being of real things. he was still out there, gazing into the hedges. i saw him in profile in the uncertain
light, motionless and knowing. was he as old as i'd first thought--or was the white hair purely emblematic,
part  of  his  allegorical  force?  that  was  it,  of  course.  he  would  be  death,  or  death's  errand-runner,  a
hollow-eyed  technician  from  the  plague  era,  from  the  era  of  inquisitions,  endless  wars,  of  bedlams  and
leprosariums. he would be an aphorist of last things, giving me the barest glance--civilized, ironic--as he
spoke his deft and stylish line about my journey out. i watched for a long time, waiting for him to move a
hand.  his  stillness  was  commanding.  i  felt  myself  getting  whiter  by  the  second.  what  does  it  mean  to
become white?  how does it  feel to see death in  the  flesh, come  to  gather you in? i was scared to the
marrow. i was cold and hot, dry and wet, myself and someone else. the fist clenched in my chest. i went
to the staircase and sat on the top step, looking into my hands. so much remained. every word and thing
a bead-work of bright creation.  my own plain hand, crosshatched  and whorled in a  mesh of expressive
lines,  a  life  terrain,  might  itself  be  the  object  of  a  person's  study  and  wonder  for  years.  a  cosmology
against the void.

closed the toilet lid and sat there a while, wondering what to do next. i didn't want him in the house.

i paced for a time. i ran cold water over my hands and wrists, splashed it in my face. i felt light and
heavy, muddled and alert. i took a scenic paperweight from the shelf by the door. inside the plastic disk
floated a 3-d picture of the grand canyon, the colors zooming and receding as i turned the object in the
light. fluctuating planes. i liked this phrase. it seemed the very music of existence. if only one could see
death as just another surface one inhabits for a time. another facet of cosmic reason. a zoom down bright
angel trail.

i  turned  to  immediate  things.  if  i  wanted  to  keep  him  out  of  the  house,  the  thing  to  do  was  go
outside.  first 1 would look in  on  the smaller children. i  moved quietly through the rooms on bare white
feet. i looked for a blanket to adjust, a toy to remove from a child's warm grasp, feeling i'd wandered into a
tv moment. all was still and well. would they regard a parent's death as just another form of divorce?

kind of trick device that uncoils abruptly when it's touched. i stood in the doorway nodding.

i  looked  in  on  babette.  she  was  many  levels  down,  a  girl  again,  a  figure  running  in  a  dream.  i
kissed her head, smelling the warm musty air that carried up from sleep. i spotted my copy of mein kampf
in  a  pile  of  books  and  journals.  the  radio  came  on.  i  hurried  out  of  the  room,  fearing  that  some  call-in
voice, some stranger's soul-lament, would be the last thing i heard in this world.

i looked in on heinrich. he occupied the top left corner of the bed, his body tightly wound like the

i got to my feet and went back to the window. he was still there. i went into the bathroom to hide. i



106

"so what the hell. here i am. big deal."
"what are you doing these days?"
"shingling  here,  rustproofing  there.  i  moonlight,  except  there's  nothing  i'm  moonlighting  from.


i went down to the kitchen. i looked through the window. he was there in the wicker armchair on
the wet grass. i opened the inner door and then the storm door. i went outside, the copy of mein kampf
clutched  to  my  stomach.  when  the  storm  door  banged  shut,  the  man's  head  jerked  and  his  legs  came
uncrossed.  he  got  to  his  feet  and  turned  in  my  direction.  the  sense  of  eerie  and  invincible  stillness
washed off, the aura of knowingness, the feeling he conveyed of an ancient and terrible secret. a second
figure began to emerge from the numinous ruins of the first, began to assume effective form, develop in
the  crisp  light  as  a  set  of  movements,  lines  and  features,  a  contour,  a  living  person  whose  distinctive
physical traits seemed more and more familiar as i watched them come into existence, a little amazed.
it was not death that stood before me but only vernon dickey, my father-in-law.

"was i asleep?" he said.

"what are you doing out here?"

"didn't want to wake you folks."

"did we know you were coming?"

"i didn't know it myself till yesterday afternoon. drove straight through.

fourteen hours."

"babette will be happy to see you."

"i just bet."


we went inside.  i put  the coffee pot on the stove.  vernon sat at  the table in his battered denim
jacket, playing with the lid of an old zippo. he had the look of a ladies' man in the crash-dive of his career.
his silvery hair had a wan tinge to it, a yellowish discolor, and he combed it back in a ducktail. he wore
about  four days' stubble. his chronic cough had  taken on a jagged edge, an element  of  irresponsibility.
babette  worried  less  about  his  condition  than  about  the  fact  that  he  took  such  sardonic  pleasure  in  his
own hackings and spasms, as if there were something fatefully attractive in this terrible noise. he still wore
a garrison belt with a longhorn buckle.



moonlight is all that's out there."

i  noticed  his  hands.  scarred,  busted,  notched,  permanently  seamed  with  grease  and  mud.  he
glanced  around  the  room,  trying  to  spot  something  that  needed  replacing  or  repair.  such  flaws  were
mainly an occasion for discourse. it put vernon at an advantage to talk about gaskets and washers, about
grouting, caulking, spackling. there were times when he seemed to attack me with terms like ratchet drill
and whipsaw. he saw my shakiness in such matters as a sign of some deeper incompetence or stupidity.
these were the things that built the world. not to know or care about them was a betrayal of fundamental
principles, a betrayal of gender, of species. what could be more useless  than a  man who couldn't  fix a
dripping  faucet--fundamentally  useless,  dead  to  history,  to  the  messages  in  his  genes?  i  wasn't  sure  i
disagreed.

widower.'"
"what did she say to that?"

"she thinks you're a danger to yourself. 'he'll fall asleep smoking. he'll die in a burning bed with a

missing  woman  at  his  side.  an  official  missing  person.  some  poor  lost  unidentified  multi-divorced
woman.'"

stringy mucus whipping back and forth in his chest. i poured his coffee and waited.

church in a mobile home. don't tell babette."
"that's the last thing i'd do."

"she'd get real exercised. start in with the discount calls."

"she thinks you've gotten too lawless for marriage."


"the thing about marriage today is you don't have to go outside the home to get those little extras.
you can get whatever you want in the recesses of the american home. these are the times we live in, for
better or worse. wives will do things. they want to do things. you don't have to drop little looks. it used to
be the only thing available in the american home was the basic natural act. now you get the options too.
the action is thick, let me tell you. it's an amazing comment on our times that the more options you get in
the home, the more prostitutes you see in the streets. how do you figure it, jack? you're the professor.
what does it mean?"

"i don't know."

"i  was  saying  to  babette  the  other  day.  'if  there's  one  thing  your  father  doesn't  resemble,  it's  a

vernon  coughed  in  appreciation  of  the  insight.  a  series  of  pulmonary  gasps.  i  could  hear  the

"just so you know where i'm at, jack, there's a woman that wants to marry my ass. she goes to

 107

to  waitresses,

intimate  remarks,

fearing  his  offhand  remarks


"wives  wear  edible  panties.  they  know  the  words,  the  usages.  meanwhile  the  prostitutes  are
standing  in  the  streets  in  all  kinds  of  weather,  day  and  night.  who  are  they  waiting  for?  tourists?
businessmen?  men  who've  been  turned  into  stalkers  of  flesh?  it's  like  the  lid's  blown  off.  didn't  i  read
somewhere the japanese go to singapore? whole planeloads of males. a remarkable people."
"are you seriously thinking of getting married?"

"i'd have to be crazy to marry a woman that worships in a mobile home."


there was an astuteness about vernon, a deadpan quality of alert and searching intelligence, a
shrewdness  waiting  for  a  shapely  occasion.  this  made  babette  nervous.  she'd  seen  him  sidle  up  to
women in public places to ask some delving question in his blank-faced canny way. she refused to go into
restaurants  with  him,
technically
accomplished asides and observations, delivered in the late-night voice of some radio ancient. he'd given
her some jittery moments, periods of anger and embarrassment, in a number of leatherette booths.

she came in now, wearing her sweatsuit, ready for an early morning dash up the stadium steps.
when she saw her father at the table, her body seemed to lose its motive force. she stood there bent at
the knees. nothing remained but her ability to gape. she appeared to be doing an imitation of a gaping
person.  she  was  the  picture  of  gapingness,  the  bright  ideal,  no  less  confused  and  alarmed  than  i  had
been when i saw him sitting in the yard, deathly still. i watched her face fill to the brim with numb wonder.
"did we know you were coming?" she said. "why didn't you call? you never call."

"here i am. big deal. toot the horn."


she remained bent at the knees, trying to absorb his raw presence, the wiry body and drawn look.
what an epic force he must have seemed to her, taking shape in her kitchen this way, a parent, a father
with all the grist of years on him, the whole dense history of associations and connections, come to remind
her who she was, to remove her disguise, grab hold of her maundering life for a time, without warning.
"i could have had things ready. you look awful. where will you sleep?"

"where did i sleep last time?"

they both looked at me, trying to remember.


as we fixed and ate breakfast, as the kids came down and warily approached vernon for kisses
and  hair-mussings,  as  the  hours  passed  and  babette  became  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  the  ambling
figure in patched jeans, i began to notice the pleasure she took in hovering nearby, doing little things for
him, being there to listen. a delight contained in routine gestures and automatic rhythms. at times she had
to remind vernon which foods were his favorites, how he liked them cooked and seasoned, which jokes
he  told  best,  which  figures  from  the  past  were  the  plain  fools,  which  the  comic  heroes.  gleanings  from
another  life  poured  out  of  her.  the  cadences  of  her  speech  changed,  took  on  a  rural  tang.  the  words
changed, the references. this was a girl who'd helped her father sand and finish old oak, heave radiators
up from the floorboards. his carpenter years, his fling with motorcycles, his biceps tattoo.

"you're getting string-beany, daddy. finish those potatoes. there's more on the stove."

and  vernon would say to me, "her mother  made the worst french fries you could ever hope to
eat. like french fries in a state park." and then he'd turn to her and say, "jack knows the problem i have
with state parks. they don't move the heart."

we moved heinrich down to the sofa and gave vernon his room. it was unnerving to find him in
the  kitchen  at  seven  in  the  morning,  at  six,  at  whatever  grayish  hour  babette  or  i  went  down  to  make
coffee. he gave the  impression he was intent on outfoxing us, working on our guilt, showing us that no
matter how little sleep we got, he got less.

"tell you what, jack. you get old, you find out you're ready for something but you don't know what
it is. you're always getting prepared. you're combing your hair, standing by the window looking out. i feel
like there's some little fussy person whisking around me all the time. that's why i jumped in the car and
drove headlong all this way."

"to break the spell," i said. "to get away from routine things. routine things can be deadly, vern,
carried  to  extremes.  i  have  a  friend  who  says  that's  why  people  take  vacations.  not  to  relax  or  find
excitement or see new places. to escape the death that exists in routine things."
"what is he, a jew?"

"what's that got to do with it?"

"your roof gutter's sagging," he told me. "you know how to fix that, don't you?"

vernon  liked  to hang around outside the house, waiting for garbage  men, telephone repairmen,

the  mail  carrier,  the  afternoon  newsboy.  someone  to  talk  to  about  techniques  and  procedures.  sets  of
special methods. routes, time spans, equipment. it tightened his grip on things, learning how work was
done in areas outside his range.


he liked to tease the kids in his deadpan way. they answered his bantering remarks reluctantly.



108

they  were  suspicious  of  all  relatives.  relatives  were  a  sensitive  issue,  part  of  the  murky  and  complex
past, the divided lives, the memories that could be refloated by a word or a name.
he liked to sit in his tortured hatchback, smoking.


babette would watch from a window, managing to express love, worry, exasperation and despair,
hope and gloom, more or less simultaneously. vernon had only to shift his weight to arouse in her a series
of extreme emotions.
he liked to mingle with shopping mall crowds.

"i'm counting on you to tell me, jack."

"tell you what?"

"you're the only person i know that's educated enough to give me the answer."

"the answer to what?"

"were people this dumb before television?"


one night i heard a voice and thought he was moaning in his sleep. i put on my robe, went into
the hall, realized the sound came from the tv set in denise's room. i went in and turned off the set. she
was  asleep  in  a  drift  of  blankets,  books  and  clothes.  on  an  impulse  i  went  quietly  to  the  open  closet,
pulled the light cord and peered inside, looking for the dylar tablets. i closed the door against my body,
which  was  half  in,  half  out  of  the  closet.  i  saw  a  great  array  of  fabrics,  shoes,  toys,  games  and  other
objects. i poked around, catching an occasional trace of some childhood redolence. clay, sneakers, pencil
shavings. the bottle might be in an abandoned shoe, the pocket of some old shirt wadded in a corner. i
heard her stir. i went still, held my breath.
"what are you doing?" she said.

"don't worry, it's only me."

"i know who it is."


i kept on looking through the closet, thinking this would make me appear less guilty.
"i know what you're looking for, too."


"denise, i've had a recent scare. i thought something awful was about to happen. it turned out i
was  wrong,  thank  goodness.  but  there  are  lingering  effects.  i  need  the  dylar.  it  may  help  me  solve  a
problem."



want to be my friend?"


take them and that'll be the end of it."
the more casual the voice, the better my chances of reaching her.

"you won't take them. you'll give them to my mother."

"let's be clear about one thing," i said like a high government official.

"your mother is not a drug addict. dylar is not that kind of medication."

"what is it then? just tell me what it is."

something in her voice or in my heart or in the absurdity of the moment allowed me to consider

the possibility of answering her question. a breakthrough. why not simply tell her? she was responsible,
able  to  gauge  the  implications  of  serious  things.  i  realized  babette  and  i  had  been  foolish  all  along,
keeping the truth from her. the girl would embrace the truth, know us better, love us more deeply in our
weakness and fear.

i went and sat at the end of the bed. she watched me carefully. i told her the basic story, leaving
out  the  tears,  the  passions,  the  terror,  the  horror,  my  exposure  to  nyodene  d.,  babette's  sexual
arrangement  with  mr.  gray,  our  argument  over  which  of  us  feared  death  more.  i  concentrated  on  the
medication itself, told her everything i knew about its life in the gastrointestinal tract and the brain.

the first thing she mentioned was the side effects. every drug has side effects. a drug that could
eliminate fear of death would have awesome side effects, especially if it is still in a trial stage. she was
right, of course. babette had spoken of outright death, brain death, left brain death, partial paralysis, other
cruel and bizarre conditions of the body and mind.
i told denise the power of suggestion could be more important than side effects.


"remember  how  you  heard  on  the  radio  that  the  billowing  cloud  caused  sweaty  palms?  your
palms got sweaty, didn't they? the power of suggestion makes some people sick, others well, it may not
matter how strong or weak dylar is. if i think it will help me, it will help me."


i continued to rummage.
"what's the problem?"
"isn't  it  enough  for  you  to  know  that  a  problem  exists?  i  wouldn't  be  here  otherwise.  don't  you

"i am your friend. i just don't want to be tricked."
"there's  no  question  of  tricking.  i  just  need  to  try  the  medication.  there  are  four  tablets  left.  i'll

"up to a point."

 109

"we are talking about death," i whispered. "in a very real sense it doesn't matter what is in those

"isn't that a little stupid?"
"this is what happens, denise, to desperate people."
there was a silence. i waited for her to ask me if this desperation was inevitable, if she would one

"just the man i want to see."
"vern, it's the middle of the night. don't you ever sleep?"
"let's go out to the car," he said.
"are you serious?"
"what we have here is a situation we ought to conduct in private. this house is full of women. or


tablets. it could be sugar, it could be spice. i am eager to be humored, to be fooled."



day experience the same fear, undergo the same ordeal.

instead she said, "strong or weak doesn't matter. i threw the bottle away."

"no, you didn't. where?"

"i put it in the garbage compactor."

"i don't believe you. when was this?"

"about a week ago. i thought baba might sneak through my room and find it. so i decided to just
get  it  over  with.  nobody  wanted  to  tell  me  what  it  was,  did  they?  so  i  threw  it  in  with  all  the  cans  and
bottles and other junk. then i compacted it."
"like a used car."

"nobody would tell me. that's all they had to do. i was right here all the time."

"it's all right. don't worry. you did me a favor."

"about eight words was all they needed to say."

"i'm better off without it."

"it wouldn't have been the first time they tricked me."

"you're still my friend," i said.


i  kissed  her  on  the  head  and  went  to  the  door.  i  realized  i  was  extremely  hungry.  i  went
downstairs  to  find  something  to  eat.  the  kitchen  light  was  on.  vernon  was  sitting  at  the  table,  fully
dressed, smoking and coughing. the ash on his cigarette was an inch long, beginning to lean. it was a
habit of his, letting the ash dangle. babette thought he did it to induce feelings of suspense and anxiety in
others. it was part of the reckless weather in which he moved.





am i wrong?"
"we're alone here. what is it you want to talk about?"

"they listen in their sleep," he said.


we went out the back door to keep from waking heinrich. i followed him along the pathway at the
side  of  the  house  and  down  the  steps  to  the  driveway.  his  little  car  sat  in  the  dark.  he  got  behind  the
wheel and i slid in next to him, gathering up my bathrobe and feeling trapped in the limited space. the car
held a smell like some dangerous vapor in the depths of a body-and-fender shop, a mixture of exhausted
metal, flammable rags and scorched rubber. the upholstery was torn. in the glow of a street-lamp i saw
wires dangling from the dash and the overhead fixture.



the hell. who cares. big deal."




himself."

of his right hand.
"take it, jack."

"what is it?"

"heft it around. get the feel. it's loaded."

he  passed  it  to  me.  stupidly  i  said  again,  "what  is  it?"  there  was  something  unreal  about  the

experience  of  holding  a  gun.  i  kept  staring  at  it,  wondering  what  vernon's  motive  might  be.  was  he
death's dark messenger after all? a loaded weapon. how quickly it worked a change in me, numbing my
hand  even  as  i  sat  staring  at  the  thing,  not  wishing  to  give  it  a  name.  did  vernon  mean  to  provoke
thought, provide my life with a fresh design, a scheme, a shapeliness? i wanted to give it back.

"i want you to have this, jack."
"have what?"
"i've had it for years. now i want you to have it. who knows if i'll ever see you folks again? what

you're giving me the car? i don't want the car. it's a terrible car."
"in your whole life as a man in today's world, have you ever owned a firearm?"
"no," i said.
"i figured. i said to myself here's the last man in america who doesn't own the means to defend

he reached into a hole in the rear seat, coming out with a small dark object. he held it in the palm



110

"it's a little bitty thing but it shoots real bullets, which is all a man in your position can rightly ask of

"maybe you need a gun where you live. take it back. we don't want it."
"i got myself a combat magnum parked near my bed. i hate to tell you what mischief it can cause

"that's the point. what am i going out there to face down? why do i need this thing?"
"don't call it a thing. respect it, jack. it's a well-designed weapon. practical, lightweight, easy to


a firearm. don't worry, jack. it can't be traced."
"why would anyone want to trace it?"


"i feel like if you give someone a loaded gun, you ought to supply the particulars. this here is a
25-caliber  zumwalt  automatic.  german-made.  it  doesn't  have  the  stopping  power  of  a  heavy-barreled
weapon but you're not going out there to face down a rhino, are you?"


conceal. get to know your handgun. it's only a question of time as to when you'll want to use it."

"when will i want to use it?"

"do we live on the same planet? what century is this? look how easy i got into your backyard. i
pry open a window and i'm in the house. i could have been a professional burglar, an escaped con, one of
those drifters with a skimpy beard. a wandering killer type that follows the sun. a weekend mass murderer
with an office job. take your choice."


with the placement of a man's features."

he  gave  me  a  canny  look.  i  resumed  staring  at  the  gun.  it  occurred  to  me  that  this  was  the
ultimate device for determining one's competence in the world. i bounced it in the palm of my hand, sniffed
the steely muzzle. what does it mean to a person, beyond his sense of competence and well-being and
personal  worth,  to  carry  a  lethal  weapon,  to  handle  it  well,  be  ready  and  willing  to  use  it?  a  concealed
lethal weapon. it was a secret, it was a second life, a second self, a dream, a spell, a plot, a delirium.
german-made.

"don't tell babette. she'd get real put out if she knew you were harboring a firearm."

"i don't want it, vern. take it back."


"don't  put  it  just  anywhere  neither.  a  kid  gets  hold  of  it,  you  have  an  immediate  situation.  be
smart. think about where to put it so it'll be right there at the time. figure out your field of fire beforehand.
if you have an intruder situation, where will he enter, how will he approach the valuables? if you have a
mental,  where  is  he  going  to  come  at  you  from?  mentals  are  unpredictable  because  they  don't  know
themselves  what  they're  doing.  they  approach  from  wherever,  from  a  tree  limb,  a  branch.  think  about
putting jagged glass on your window ledges. learn dropping to the floor fast."
"we don't want guns in our little town."

"be smart for once in your life," he told me in the dark car. "it's not what you want that matters."


early  the next day a crew came  to  fix  the street.  vernon was out  there  at once,  watching  them
jackhammer  and  haul  the  asphalt,  staying  close  to  them  as  they  leveled  the  smoking  pitch.  when  the
workmen left, his visit seemed to end, collapsed into its own lading momentum. we began to see a blank
space where vernon stood. he regarded us from a prudent distance, as if we were strangers with secret
resentments. an indefinable fatigue collected around our efforts to converse.

out on the sidewalk, babette held him and wept. for his departure he'd shaved, washed the car,
put a blue bandanna around his neck. she could not seem to get enough of crying. she looked into his
face and cried. she cried embracing him. she gave him a styrofoam hamper full of sandwiches, chicken
and coffee, and she cried as he set it down amid the gouged-out seat stuffing and slashed upholstery.
"she's a good girl," he told me grimly.


in the driver's seat he ran his fingers through his ducktail, checking himself in the rearview mirror.
then he coughed a while, giving us one more episode of lashing phlegm. babette wept anew. we leaned
toward the window on the passenger's side, watching him hunch around into his driving posture, setting
himself casually between the door and the seat, his left arm hanging out the window.

"don't worry about me," he said. "the little limp means nothing. people my age limp. a limp is a
natural thing at a certain age. forget the cough. it's healthy to cough. you move the stuff around. the stuff
can't harm you as long as it doesn't settle in one spot and stay there for years. so the cough's all right. so
is  the  insomnia.  the  insomnia's  all  right.  what  do  i  gain  by  sleeping?  you  reach  an  age  when  every
minute  of  sleep  is  one  less  minute  to  do  useful  things.  to  cough  or  limp.  never  mind  the  women.  the
women  are  all  right.  we  rent  a  cassette  and  have  some  sex.  it  pumps  blood  to  the  heart.  forget  the
cigarettes. i like to tell myself i'm getting away with something. let the mormons quit smoking. they'll die
of something just as bad. the money's no problem. i'm all set incomewise. zero pensions, zero savings,
zero stocks and bonds. so you don't have to worry about  that.  that's all taken care of. never  mind  the
teeth. the teeth are all right. the looser they are, the more you can wobble them with your tongue. it gives
the tongue something to do. don't worry about the shakes. everybody gets the shakes now and then. it's

 111

denise passed word to babette that steffie was routinely examining her chest for lumps. babette

only the left hand anyway. the way to enjoy the shakes is pretend it's somebody else's hand. never mind
the sudden and unexplained weight loss. there's no  point eating what you can't see. don't worry about
the eyes. the eyes can't get any worse than they are now. forget the mind completely. the mind goes
before the body. that's the way it's supposed to be. so don't worry about the mind. the mind is all right.
worry about the car. the steering's all awry. the brakes were recalled three times. the hood shoots up
on pothole terrain."

deadpan. babette thought this last part was funny. the part about the car. i stood there amazed,
watching her walk in little circles of hilarity, weak-kneed, shambling, all her fears and defenses adrift in the
sly history of his voice.


34

the  time  of  spiders  arrived.  spiders  in  high  corners  of  rooms.  cocoons  wrapped  in  spiderwork.  silvery
dancing strands that seemed the pure play of light, light as evanescent news, ideas borne on light. the
voice upstairs said: "now watch this. joanie is trying to snap ralph's patella with a bushido stun kick. she
makes contact, he crumples, she runs."

told me.

murray and i extended the range of our contemplative walks. in town one day he went into small
embarrassed  raptures  over  diagonal  parking.  there  was  a  charm  and  a  native  sense  to  the  rows  of
slanted vehicles. this form of parking was an indispensable part of the american townscape, even when
the cars were foreign-made. the arrangement was not only practical but avoided confrontation, the sexual
assault motif of front-to-back parking in teeming city streets.
murray says it is possible to be homesick for a place even when you are there.


the two-story world of an ordinary main street. modest, sensible, commercial in an unhurried way,
a prewar way, with prewar traces of architectural detail surviving in the upper stories, in copper cornices
and leaded windows, in the amphora frieze above the dime-store entrance.
it made me think of the law of ruins.


i  told  murray  that  albert  speer  wanted  to  build  structures  that  would  decay  gloriously,
impressively,  like  roman  ruins.  no  rusty  hulks  or  gnarled  steel  slums.  he  knew  that  hitler  would  be  in
favor of anything that might astonish posterity. he did a drawing of a reich structure that was to be built of
special  materials,  allowing  it  to  crumble  romantically--a  drawing  of  fallen  walls,  half  columns  furled  in
wisteria.  the  ruin  is  built  into  the  creation,  i  said,  which  shows  a  certain  nostalgia  behind  the  power
principle, or a tendency to organize the longings of future generations.

murray said, "i don't trust anybody's nostalgia but my own. nostalgia is a product of dissatisfaction
and rage. it's a settling of grievances between the present and the past. the more powerful the nostalgia,
the  closer  you  come  to  violence.  war  is  the  form  nostalgia  takes  when  men  are  hard-pressed  to  say
something good about their country."

a  humid  spell  of  weather.  i  opened  the  refrigerator,  peered  into  the  freezer  compartment.  a
strange crackling sound came off the plastic food wrap, the snug covering for half eaten things, the ziploc
sacks of livers  and ribs, all  gleaming with sleety crystals.  a cold dry sizzle.  a sound  like some  element
breaking down, resolving itself into freon vapors. an eerie static, insistent but near subliminal, that made
me think of wintering souls, some form of dormant life approaching the threshold of perception.
no one was around. i walked across the kitchen, opened the compactor drawer and looked inside

the  trash bag. an oozing cube of semi-mangled cans, clothes hangers, animal bones and other refuse.
the bottles were broken, the cartons flat. product colors were undiminished in brightness and intensity.
fats,  juices  and  heavy  sludges  seeped  through  layers  of  pressed  vegetable  matter.  i  felt  like  an
archaeologist about to sift through a finding of tool fragments and assorted cave trash. it was about ten
days since denise had compacted the dylar. that particular round of garbage had almost certainly been
taken  outside  and  collected  by  now.  even  if  it  hadn't,  the  tablets  had  surely  been  demolished  by  the
compactor ram.

through the garbage.

i  unfolded  the  bag  cuffs,  released  the  latch  and  lifted  out  the  bag.  the  full  stench  hit  me  with
shocking force. was this ours? did it belong to us? had we created it? i took the bag out to the garage
and emptied it. the compressed bulk sat there like an ironic modern sculpture, massive, squat, mocking. i

these facts were helpful in my efforts to believe that i was merely passing time, casually thumbing



112

jabbed  at  it  with  the  butt  end  of  a  rake  and  then  spread  the  material  over  the  concrete  floor.  i  picked
through  it  item  by  item,  mass  by  shapeless  mass,  wondering  why  i  felt  guilty,  a  violator  of  privacy,
uncovering intimate and perhaps shameful secrets. it was hard not to be distracted by some of the things
they'd chosen to submit to the juggernaut appliance. but why did i feel like a household spy? is garbage
so private? does it glow at the core with personal heat, with signs of one's deepest nature, clues to secret
yearnings, humiliating flaws? what habits, fetishes, addictions, inclinations? what solitary acts, behavioral
ruts? i found crayon drawings of a  figure with full breasts and male genitals. there was a long piece of
twine that contained a series of knots and loops. it seemed at first a random construction. looking more
closely i thought i detected a complex relationship between the size of the loops, the degree of the knots
(single or double) and the intervals between knots with loops and freestanding knots. some kind of occult
geometry or symbolic  festoon of obsessions.  i  found  a banana skin with a tampon  inside. was  this  the
dark  underside  of  consumer  consciousness?  i  came  across  a  horrible  clotted  mass  of  hair,  soap,  ear
swabs,  crushed  roaches,  flip-top  rings,  sterile  pads  smeared  with  pus  and  bacon  fat,  strands  of  frayed
dental floss, fragments of ballpoint refills, toothpicks still displaying bits of impaled food. there was a pair
of shredded undershorts with lipstick markings, perhaps a memento of the grayview motel.

but no sign anywhere of a shattered amber vial or the remains of those saucer-shaped tablets. it
didn't matter. i would face whatever had to be faced without chemical assistance. babette had said dylar
was fool's gold.  she was right, winnie richards was  right, denise was right. they were  my friends and
they were right.

i decided to take another physical. when the results were in, i went to see dr. chakravarty in his
little office in the medical building. he sat there reading the printout, a man with a puffy face and shadowy
eyes, his long hands set flat on the desk, his head wagging slightly.

who regards his status seriously."
"what status?"


"his  status  as  a  patient.  people  tend  to  forget  they  are  patients.  once  they  leave  the  doctor's
office or the hospital, they simply put it out of their minds. but you are all permanent patients, like it or not.
i am the doctor, you the patient. doctor doesn't cease being doctor at close of day. neither should patient.
people expect doctor to go about things with the utmost seriousness, skill and experience. but what about
patient? how professional is he?"


with computerized stars."




there is the question of a gel barrier. do you know what this means?"


know."
"exactly how elevated is my potassium?"

"it has gone through the roof, evidently."

"what might this be a sign of?"

"it could mean nothing, it could mean a very great deal indeed."

"how great?"

"now we are getting into semantics," he said.


"what i'm trying to get at is could this potassium be an indication of some condition just beginning
to manifest itself, some condition caused perhaps by an ingestion, an exposure, an involuntary spillage-
intake, some substance in the air or the rain?"









"have you in fact come into contact with such a substance?"
"no," i said.
"are you sure?"
"positive. why, do the numbers show some sign of possible exposure?"
"if you haven't been exposed, then they couldn't very well show a sign, could they?"
"then we agree," i said.
"tell me this, mr. gladney, in all honesty. how do you feel?"
"to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  i  feel  very  well.  first-rate.  i  feel  better  than  i  have  in  years,

he did not look up from the printout as he said these things in his meticulous singsong.
"i don't think i like your potassium very much at all," he went on. "look here. a bracketed number

"here you are again, mr. gladney. we see you so often these days. how nice it is to find a patient

"what does that mean?"
"there's no point your knowing at this stage."
"how was my potassium last time?"
"quite  average  in  fact.  but  perhaps  this  is  a  false  elevation.  we  are  dealing  with  whole  blood.

"no."
"there isn't time to explain. we have true elevation and false elevations. this is all you have to

 113

"i'll need time to think about it."
"in any case, prevention is the thing, isn't it? i've just seen the latest issue of american mortician.
quite a shocking picture. the industry is barely adequate to accommodating the vast numbers of

"what do you mean, relatively speaking?"
"given the fact i'm older now."
he looked at me carefully. he seemed to be trying to stare me down. then he made a note on my

relatively speaking."



record. i might have been a child facing the school principal over a series of unexcused absences.
i said, "how can we tell whether the elevation is true or false?"


"i will send you to glassboro for further tests. would you like that? there is a brand-new facility
called autumn harvest farms. they have gleaming new equipment. you won't be disappointed, wait and
see. it gleams, absolutely."

"all right. but is potassium the only thing we have to watch?"

"the  less  you  know,  the  better.  go  to  glassboro.  tell  them  to  delve  thoroughly.  no  stone
unturned. tell them to send you back to me with sealed results. i will analyze them down to the smallest
detail. i will absolutely pick them apart. they have the know-how at harvest farms, the most delicate of
instruments, i promise you. the best of third-world technicians, the latest procedures."
his bright smile hung there like a peach on a tree.


"together, as doctor and patient, we can do things that neither of us could do separately. there is
not  enough  emphasis  on  prevention.  an  ounce  of  prevention,  goes  the  saying.  is  this  a  proverb  or  a
maxim? surely professor can tell us."



dead."

babette was right. he spoke english beautifully. i went home and started throwing things away. i
threw away fishing lures, dead tennis balls, torn luggage. i ransacked the attic for old furniture, discarded
lampshades, warped screens, bent curtain rods. i threw away picture frames, shoe trees, umbrella stands,
wall brackets, highchairs and cribs, collapsible tv trays, beanbag chairs, broken turntables. i threw away
shelf  paper,  faded  stationery,  manuscripts  of  articles  i'd  written,  galley  proofs  of  the  same  articles,  the
journals in  which  the articles were  printed.  the  more  things  i threw away, the more i  found.  the house
was a sepia maze of old and tired things. there was an immensity of things, an overburdening weight, a
connection,  a  mortality.  i  stalked  the  rooms,  flinging  things  into  cardboard  boxes.  plastic  electric  fans,
burnt-out  toasters,  star  trek  needlepoints.  it  took  well  over  an  hour  to  get  everything  down  to  the
sidewalk. no one helped me. i didn't want help or company or human understanding. i just wanted to get
the stuff out of the house. i sat on the front steps alone, waiting for a sense of ease and peace to settle in
the air around me.

pain reliever."


35

babette could not get enough of talk radio.

"i hate my face," a woman said. "this is an ongoing problem with me for years. of all the faces
you could have given me, looks wise, this one has got to be the worst. but how can i not look? even if you
took all my mirrors away, i would still find a way to look. how can i not look on the one hand? but i hate it
on the other. in other words i still look. because whose face is it, obviously? what do i do, forget it's there,
pretend  it's  someone  else's?  what  i'm  trying  to  do  with  this  call,  mel,  is  find  other  people  who  have  a
problem accepting  their  face. here  are some questions to get us started.  what did you look like before
you were born? what will you look like in the afterlife, regardless of race or color?"

babette wore her sweatsuit almost all the time. it was a plain gray outfit, loose and drooping. she
cooked in it, drove the kids to school, wore it to the hardware store and the stationer's. i thought about it
for  a  while,  decided  there  was  nothing  excessively  odd  in  this,  nothing  to  worry  about,  no  reason  to
believe she was sinking into apathy and despair.
"how do you feel?" i said. 'tell the truth."


"what is the truth? i'm spending more time with wilder. wilder helps me get by."

"i depend on you to be the healthy outgoing former babette. i need this as badly as you do, if not
more."


a woman passing on the street said, "a decongestant, an antihistamine, a cough suppressant, a

"what is need? we all need. where is the uniqueness in this?"



114

denise let her mouth fall open, bent her body at the knees. in truth i wasn't sure her mother was

"it is all a corporate tie-in," babette said in summary. 'the sunscreen, the marketing, the fear, the

"besides, i'm a runner," she said. "a runner by definition is less likely to be struck by damaging

denise spun in my direction, arms flung out, her body beseeching me to set the woman straight.
"the worst rays are direct,"  babette said. "this  means the faster  a person is moving,  the  more


"are you feeling basically the same?"

"you mean am i sick unto death? the fear hasn't gone, jack."

"we have to stay active."

"active helps but wilder helps more."

"is it my imagination," i said, "or is he talking less than ever?"

'there's enough talk. what is talk? i don't want him to talk. the less he talks, the better."

"denise worries about you."

"who?"

"denise."

"talk is radio," she said.

denise would not let her mother go running unless she promised to apply layers of sunscreen gel.
the girl would follow her out of the house to dash a final glob of lotion across the back of babette's neck,
then stand on her toes to stroke it evenly in. she tried to cover every exposed spot. the brows, the lids.
they had bitter arguments about the need for this. denise said the sun was a risk to a fair-skinned person.
her mother claimed the whole business was publicity for disease.

rays than a standing or walking figure."


likely she is to receive only partial hits, glancing rays, deflections."

wrong.

disease. you can't have one without the other."


i  took  heinrich  and  his  snake-handling  buddy,  orest  mercator,  out  to  the  commercial  strip  for
dinner.  it  was  four  in  the  afternoon,  the  time  of  day  when  orest's  training  schedule  called  for  his  main
meal.  at  his  request  we  went  to  vincent's  casa  mario,  a  blockhouse  structure  with  slit  windows  that
seemed part of some coastal defense system.


shoulders seemed broader than ever, the serious head partly submerged between them.









a mamba approaches, whatever."



about."


the negative."
"tell me this, then. what is the negative? what do you think of when you think of the negative?"


"here's what i think. i'm nothing without the snakes. that's the only negative. the negative is if it
doesn't come off, if the humane society doesn't let me in the cage. how can i be the best at what i do if
they don't let me do it?"
i  liked  to  watch  orest  eat.  he  inhaled  food  according  to  aerodynamic  principles.  pressure

differences,  intake  velocities.  he  went  at  it  silently  and  purposefully,  loading  up,  centering  himself,
appearing to grow more self-important with each clump of starch that slid over his tongue.

"you know you can get bitten. we talked about it last time. do you think about what happens after
the fangs close on your wrist? do you think about dying? this is what i want to know. does death scare

"how's the training going?" i said.
"i'm slowing it down a little. i don't want to peak too soon. i know how to take care of my body."
"heinrich told me you sleep sitting up, to prepare for the cage."
"i perfected that. i'm doing different stuff now."
"like what?"
"loading up on carbohydrates."
"that's why we came here," heinrich said.
"i load up a little more each day."
"it's because of the huge energy he'll be burning up in the cage, being alert, tensing himself when

i'd found myself thinking of orest and his snakes and wanted a chance to talk to him further.
we  sat  in  a  blood-red  booth.  orest  gripped  the  tasseled  menu  with  his  chunky  hands.  his

we ordered pasta and water.
"tell me, orest. as you get closer and closer to the time, are you beginning to feel anxious?"
"what anxious? i just want to get in the cage. sooner the better. this is what orest mercator is all

"you're not nervous? you don't think about what might happen?"
"he likes to be positive," heinrich said. "this is the thing today with athletes. you don't dwell on

 115

i looked at my son. i said, "is he trying to tell us there are more people dying in this twenty-four-

"it depends on what you mean by anywhere else."
"i don't know what i mean. the drowned. the blown-to-bits."
"there are more dead now than ever before. that's all he's saying."
i looked at him a while longer. then i turned to orest.
"you are intentionally facing death. you are setting out to do exactly what people spend their lives

"my  trainer  says,  'breathe,  don't  think.'  he  says,  'be  a  snake  and  you'll  know  the  stillness  of  a

"he has a trainer now," heinrich said.
"he's a sunny moslem," orest said.
"iron city has some sunnies out near the airport."
"the sunnies are mostly korean. except mine's an arab, i think."
i said, "don't you mean the moonies are mostly korean?"
"he's a sunny," orest said.
"but  it's  the  moonies  who  are  mostly  korean.  except  they're  not,  of  course.  it's  only  the

"he's saying the dead are greater today than ever before, combined."
"what dead? define the dead."
"he's saying people now dead."
"what do you mean, now dead? everybody who's dead is now dead."
"he's saying people in graves. the known dead. those you can count."
i was listening intently, trying to grasp what they meant. a second plate of food came for orest.
"but  people sometimes stay in graves for hundreds  of years.  is he saying  there are more dead

you? does it haunt your thoughts? let me put my cards on the table, orest. are you afraid to die? do you
experience fear? does fear make you tremble or sweat? do you feel a shadow fall across the room when
you think of the cage, the snakes, the fangs?"

"what did i read just the other day? there are more people dead today than in the rest of world
history put together. what's one extra? i'd just as soon die while i'm trying to put orest mercator's name in
the record book."

hour period than in the rest of human history up to now?"







people in graves than anywhere else?"





trying not to do. die. i want to know why."

snake.'"







leadership."

they  thought  about  this.  i  watched  orest  eat.  i  watched  him  pitchfork  the  spaghetti  down  his
gullet. the serious head sat motionless, an entryway for the food. that flew off the mechanical fork. what
purpose  he  conveyed,  what  sense  of  a  fixed  course  of  action  pursued  absolutely.  if  each  of  us  is  the
center of his or her existence, orest seemed intent on enlarging the center, making it everything. is this
what athletes do, occupy the self more fully? it's possible we envy them for a prowess that has little to do
with sport. in building toward a danger, they escape it in some deeper sense, they dwell in some angelic
scan, able to leap free of everyday dying. but was orest an athlete? he would do nothing but sit-- sit for
sixty-seven days in a glass cage, waiting to be publicly bitten.
"you will not be able to defend yourself," i said. "not only that but you will be in a cage with the

most  slimy,  feared  and  repulsive  creatures  on  earth.  snakes.  people  have  nightmares  about  snakes.
crawling slithering coldblooded egg-laying vertebrates. people go to psychiatrists. snakes have a special
slimy place in our collective unconscious. and you are voluntarily getting into an enclosed space with thirty
or forty of the most venomous snakes in the world."
"what slimy? they're not slimy."


"the famous sliminess is a myth," heinrich said. "he's getting into a cage with gaboon vipers with
two-inch fangs. maybe a dozen mambas. the mamba happens to be the fastest-moving land snake in the
world. isn't sliminess a little besides the point?"

was on television last night."
"everything was on television last night," orest said.


i  admired  the  reply.  i  guess  i  admired  him  too.  he  was  creating  an  imperial  self  out  of  some
tabloid  aspiration.  he  would  train  relentlessly,  speak  of  himself  in  the  third  person,  load  up  on
carbohydrates. his trainer was always there, his friends drawn to the aura of inspired risk. he would grow
in life-strength as he neared the time.

thing. a person can be a thousand things."

"that's my argument exactly. fangs. snakebite. fifty thousand people a year die of snakebite. it

"his trainer is teaching him how to breathe in the old way, the sunny moslem way. a snake is one



116

"the eternal wisdom of those who iron and sew."
"ask yourself what it is you want more, to ease your ancient fear or to revenge your childish dopey

when we got home, i found her ironing in the bedroom.
"what are you doing?" i said.
"listening to the radio. except it just went off."
"if you thought we were finished with mr. gray, it's time to bring you up to date."
"are  we  talking  about  mr.  gray  the  composite  or  mr.  gray  the  individual?  it  makes  all  the

"it certainly does. denise compacted the pills."
"does that mean we're all through with the composite?"
"i don't know what it means."
"does it mean you've turned your male attention to the individual in the motel?"
"i didn't say that."
"you  don't  have  to  say  it.  you're  a  male.  a  male  follows  the  path  of  homicidal  rage.  it  is  the



do it. like they believe him now. the total package."
if the self is death, how can it also be stronger than death?


i called for the check. extraneous flashes of mr. gray. a drizzling image in gray shorts and socks.
i lifted several bills from my wallet, rubbing hard with my fingers to make sure there weren't others stuck to
them.  in  the  motel  mirror  was  my  full-length  wife,  white-bodied,  full-bosomed,  pink-kneed,  stub-toed,
wearing only peppermint legwarmers, like a sophomore leading cheers at an orgy.





difference."






biological path. the path of plain dumb blind male biology."
"how smug, ironing handkerchiefs."


"jack, when you die, i will just fall to the floor and stay there. eventually, maybe, after a very long
time, they will find me crouching in the dark, a woman without speech or gesture. but in the meantime i
will not help you find this man or his medication."


injured male pride."

i went down the hall to help steffie finish packing. a sports announcer said: "they're not booing--
they're  saying,  'bruce,  bruce.'"  denise  and  wilder  were  in  there  with  her.  i  gathered  from  the  veiled
atmosphere  that  denise  had  been  giving  confidential  advice  on  visits  to  distant  parents.  steffie's  flight
would originate in boston and make two stops between iron city and mexico city but she wouldn't have to
change planes, so the situation seemed manageable.




back."








to get her back."





comes."

do whatever had to be done to get her back here. she looked at denise.

before."


"what if she doesn't?" denise said. "it happens, you know."
"it won't happen this time."
"you'll have to kidnap her back."
"that won't be necessary."
"what if it is?" steffie said.
"would you do it?" denise said.
"it won't happen in a million years."
"it happens all the time," she said. "one parent takes the child, the other parent hires kidnappers

"what if she keeps me?" steffie said. "what will you do?"
"he'll have to send people to mexico. that's the only thing he can do."
"but will he do it?" she said.
"your mother knows she can't keep you," i said. "she travels all the time. it's out of the question."
"don't  worry,"  denise  told  her.  "no  matter  what  he  says  now,  he'll  get  you  back  when  the  time

"how do i know i'll recognize my mother?"
"you saw her last year," i said. "you liked her."
"what if she refuses to send me back?"
"we have denise to thank for that idea, don't we? thank you, denise. don't worry. she'll send you

"be a snake," orest said.
"people are getting interested," heinrich said. "it's like it's starting to build. like he's really going to

steffie looked at me with deep interest and curiosity. i told her i would travel to mexico myself and

"it's better to hire people," the older girl said helpfully. "that way you have someone who's done it

babette came in and picked up wilder.

 117

about three hours after we'd first become aware of it, the vapor suddenly lifted, saving us from our

"there you are," she said. "we're going to the airport with steffie. yes we are. yes yes."

"bruce, bruce."


the  next  day  there  was  an  evacuation  for  noxious  odor.  simuvac  vehicles  were  everywhere.
men  in  mylex  suits  patrolled  the  streets,  many  of  them  carrying  instruments  to  measure  harm.  the
consulting firm that conceived the evacuation gathered a small group of computer-screened volunteers in
a police van in the supermarket parking lot. there was half an hour of self-induced gagging and vomiting.
the episode was recorded on videotape and sent somewhere for analysis.

three days later an actual noxious odor drifted across the river. a pause, a careful thoughtfulness,
seemed to settle on the town. traffic moved more slowly, drivers were exceedingly polite. there was no
sign of official action, no jitneys or ambulettes painted in primary colors. people avoided looking at each
other directly. an irritating sting in the nostrils, a taste of copper on the tongue. as time passed, the will to
do nothing seemed to deepen, to fix itself firmly. there were those who denied they smelled anything at
all. it is always that way with odors. there were those who professed not to see the irony of their inaction.
they'd  taken  part  in  the  simuvac  exercise  but  were  reluctant  to  flee  now.  there  were  those  who
wondered  what  caused  the  odor,  those  who  looked  worried,  those  who  said  the  absence  of  technical
personnel meant there was nothing to worry about. our eyes began to water.

formal deliberations.


36

now and then i thought of the zumwalt automatic hidden in the bedroom.

the  time  of  dangling  insects  arrived.  white  houses  with  caterpillars  dangling  from  the  eaves.
white stones in driveways. you can walk at night down the middle of the street and hear women talking
on the telephone. wanner weather produces voices in the dark. they are talking about their adolescent
sons. how big, how fast. the sons are almost frightening. the quantities they eat. the way they loom in
doorways.  these  are  the  days  that  are  full  of  wormy  bugs.  they  are  in  the  grass,  stuck  to  the  siding,
hanging in the air, hanging from the trees and eaves, stuck to the window screens. the women talk long-
distance  to  the  grandparents  of  the  growing  boys.  they  share  the  trimline  phone,  beamish  old  folks  in
hand-knit sweaters on fixed incomes.


to a jack gladney. do you accept?"








years."




these. there is little time for whimsy."

her tiny piping voice bounced down to me from a hollow ball in geosynchronous orbit.

"if heinrich wants to visit you this summer, it's all right with me. let him ride horses, fish for trout.
but i don't want him getting involved in something personal and intense, like religion. there's already been
some kidnap talk around here. people are edgy."
"the last age is the age of darkness."

"fine. now tell me what you want."


"nothing.  i have  everything.  peace of mind, purpose,  true  fellowship. i  only wish  to  greet you.  i
greet you, jack. i miss you. i miss your voice. i only wish to talk a while, pass a moment or two in friendly
reminiscence."

"hello, janet. what do you want?"
"just to say hello. to ask how you are. we haven't talked in ages."
"talked?"
"swami wants to know if our son is coming to the ashram this summer."
"our son?"
"yours, mine and his. swami regards the children of his followers as his children."
"i sent a daughter to mexico last week. when she gets back, i'll be ready to talk about the son."
"swami  says  montana  will  be  good  for  the  boy.  he  will  grow  out,  fill  out.  these  are  his  touchy

what happens to them when the commercial ends?
i got a call myself one night. the operator said, 'there's a mother devi that wishes to talk collect

"why are you calling? seriously."
"just to greet you, jack. we greet each other here."
"is he one of those whimsical swamis with a snow-white beard? sort of fun to look at?"
"we're serious people here. the cycle of history has but four ages. we happen to be in the last of



118

when i got home i found babette in her sweatsuit by the bedroom window, staring into the night.


i hung up and went for a walk. the women were in their lighted homes, talking on the phone. did
swami have twinkling eyes? would he be able to answer the boy's questions where i had failed, provide
assurances where i had incited bickering and debate? how final is the age of darkness? does it mean
supreme  destruction,  a  night  that  swallows  existence  so  completely  that  i  am  cured  of  my  own  lonely
dying? i listened to the women talk. all sound, all souls.



delegates to  the hitler conference began arriving.  about ninety hitler scholars would spend  the
three  days  of  the  conference  attending  lectures,  appearing  on  panels,  going  to  movies.  they  would
wander the campus with their names lettered in gothic type on laminated tags pinned to their lapels. they
would  exchange  hitler  gossip,  spread  the  usual  sensational  rumors  about  the  last  days  in  the
führerbunker.

it  was  interesting  to  see  how  closely  they  resembled  each  other  despite  the  wide  diversity  of
national and regional backgrounds.  they were cheerful and eager, given  to spitting when they laughed,
given to outdated dress, homeliness, punctuality. they seemed to have a taste for sweets.

i welcomed them in the starkly modern chapel. i spoke in german, from notes, for five minutes. i
talked mainly about hitler's mother, brother and dog. his dog's name was wolf. this word is the same in
english and german. most of the words i used in my address were the same or nearly the same in both
languages. i'd spent days with the dictionary, compiling lists of such words. my remarks were necessarily
disjointed and odd. i made many references to wolf, many more to the mother and the brother, a few to
shoes and socks, a few to jazz, beer and baseball. of course there was hitler himself. i spoke the name
often, hoping it would overpower my insecure sentence structure.

the rest of the time i tried to avoid the germans in the group. even in my black gown and dark
glasses,  with  my  name  in  nazi  typeface  over  my  heart,  i  felt  feeble  in  their  presence,  death-prone,
listening to them produce their guttural sounds, their words, their heavy metal. they told hitler jokes and
played pinochle. all i could do was mutter a random monosyllable, rock with empty laughter. i spent a lot
of time in my office, hiding.
whenever  i  remembered  the  gun,  lurking  in  a  stack  of  undershirts  like  a  tropical  insect,  i  felt  a

small intense sensation pass through me. whether pleasurable or fearful i wasn't sure. i knew it mainly as
a childhood moment, the profound stir of secret-keeping.

what  a  sly  device  a  handgun  is.  one  so  small  in  particular.  an  intimate  and  cunning  thing,  a
secret history of the man who owns it. i recalled how i'd felt some days earlier, trying to find the dylar. like
someone spying on the family garbage. was i immersing myself, little by little, in a secret life? did i think it
was my last defense against the ruin worked out for me so casually by the force or nonforce, the principle
or power or chaos that determines such things? perhaps i was beginning to understand my ex-wives and
their ties to intelligence.

the hitler scholars assembled, wandered, ate voraciously, laughed through oversized teeth. i sat
at  my  desk  in  the  dark,  thinking  of  secrets.  are  secrets  a  tunnel  to  a  dreamworld  where  you  control
events?

in the evening i sped out to the airport to meet my daughter's plane. she was excited and happy,
wore mexican things. she said the people who sent her mother books to review wouldn't leave her alone.
dana was getting big thick novels every day, writing reviews which she microfilmed and sent to a secret
archive.  she  complained  of  jangled  nerves,  periods  of  deep  spiritual  fatigue.  she  told  steffie  she  was
thinking of coming in from the cold.

in the morning i sped out to glassboro to take the further tests my doctor had advised, at autumn
harvest  farms.  the  seriousness  of  such  an  occasion  is  directly  proportionate  to  the  number  of  bodily
emissions you are asked to cull for analysis. i carried with me several specimen bottles, each containing
some  melancholy  waste  or  secretion.  alone  in  the  glove  compartment  rode  an  ominous  plastic  locket,
which i'd reverently enclosed in three interlocking baggies, successively twist-tied. here was a daub of the
most  solemn  waste  of  all,  certain  to  be  looked  upon  by  the  technicians  on  duty  with  the  mingled
deference, awe and dread we have come to associate with exotic religions of the world.

but first i had to find the place. it turned out to be a functional pale brick building, one story, with
slab  floors  and  bright  lighting.  why  would  such  a  place  be  called  autumn  harvest  farms?  was  this  an
attempt to balance the heartlessness of their gleaming precision equipment? would a quaint name fool us
into thinking we live in pre-cancerous times? what kind of condition might we expect to have diagnosed in
a  facility  called  autumn  harvest  farms?  whooping  cough,  croup?  a  touch  of  the  grippe?  familiar  old
farmhouse  miseries  calling  for  bed  rest,  a  deep  chest  massage  with  soothing  vicks  vaporub.  would
someone read to us from david copperfield?

 119

"how long before the results are in?"
"the results are in," he said.
"i  thought  we  were  here  for  a  general  discussion.  the  human  part.  what  the  machines  can't

"the numbers are ready."
"i'm not sure i'm ready. all those gleaming devices are a little unsettling. i could easily imagine a


i had misgivings. they took my samples away, sat me down at a computer console. in response
to questions on the screen i tapped out the story of my life and death, little by little, each response eliciting
further questions  in an unforgiving progression of sets and subsets.  i  lied three times.  they gave  me a
loose-fitting  garment  and  a  wristband  id.  they  sent  me  down  narrow  corridors  for  measuring  and
weighing,  for blood-testing, brain-graphing,  the recording of currents traversing  my heart. they scanned
and probedin room after room, each cubicle appearing slightly smaller than the one before it, more harshly
lighted,  emptier  of  human  furnishings.  always  a  new  technician.  always  faceless  fellow  patients  in  the
mazelike halls, crossing from room to room, identically gowned. no one said hello. they attached me to a
seesaw  device,  turned  me  upside  down  and  let  me  hang  for  sixty  seconds.  a  printout  emerged  from  a
device  nearby.  they  put  me  on  a  treadmill  and  told  me  to  run,  run.  instruments  were  strapped  to  my
thighs, electrodes planted on my chest. they inserted me in an imaging block, some kind of computerized
scanner. someone sat typing at a console, transmitting a message to the machine that would make my
body  transparent.  i  heard  magnetic  winds,  saw  flashes  of  northern  light.  people  crossed  the  hall  like
wandering souls, holding their urine aloft in pale beakers. i stood in a room the size of a closet. they told
me to hold one finger in front of my face, close my left eye. the panel slid shut, a white light flashed. they
were trying to help me, to save me.

eventually, dressed again, i sat across a desk from a nervous young man in a white smock. he
studied my file, mumbling something about being new at this. i was surprised to find that this fact did not
upset me. i think i was even relieved.



detect. in two or three days the actual numbers would be ready."


perfectly healthy person being made ill just taking these tests."

"why should anyone be made ill? these are the most accurate test devices anywhere. we have
sophisticated computers to analyze the data. this equipment saves lives. believe me, i've seen it happen.
we have equipment that works better than the latest x-ray machine or cat scanner. we can see more
deeply, more accurately."

he  seemed  to  be  gaining  confidence.  he  was  a  mild-eyed  fellow  with  a  poor  complexion  and
reminded  me  of  the  boys  at  the  supermarket  who  stand  at  the  end  of  the  checkout  counter  bagging
merchandise.

"here's  how  we  usually  start,"  he  said.  "i  ask  questions  based  on  the  printout  and  then  you
answer to the best of your ability. when we're all finished, i give you the printout in a sealed envelope and
you take it to your doctor for a paid visit."



















like some decaf or tea. we don't provide sugar."



"good."
"good. we usually start by asking how do you feel."
"based on the printout?"
"just how do you feel," he said in a mild voice.
"in my own mind, in real terms, i feel relatively sound, pending confirmation."
"we usually go on to tired. have you recently been feeling tired?"
"what do people usually say?"
"mild fatigue is a popular answer."
"i could say exactly that and be convinced in my own mind it's a fair and accurate description."
he seemed satisfied with the reply and made a bold notation on the page in front of him.
"what about appetite?" he said.
"i could go either way on that."
"that's more or less how i could go, based on the printout."
"in other words you're saying sometimes i have appetitive reinforcement, sometimes i don't."
"are you telling me or asking me?"
"it depends on what the numbers say."
"then we agree."
"good."
"good," he said. "now what about sleep? we usually do sleep before we ask the person if they'd

"do you get a lot of people who have trouble sleeping?"
"only in the last stages."



120

"here's where we ask about smoking."
"that's easy. the answer is no. and it's not a matter of having stopped five or ten years ago. i've

"that's always a plus."
i felt tremendously reassured and grateful.
"we're moving right along, aren't we?"
"some people like to drag it out," he said. 'they get interested in their own condition. it becomes

"who needs nicotine? not only that, i rarely drink coffee and certainly never with caffeine. can't

"the last stages of life."
"that's what i thought. good. the only thing i have is some low threshold animation."
"good."
"i get a little restless. who doesn't?"
"toss and turn?"
"toss," i said.
"good."
"good."
he made some notes. it seemed to be going well. i was heartened to see how well it was going. i


sleep?"









turned down his offer of tea, which seemed to please him. we were moving right along.


never smoked. even when i was a teenager. never tried it. never saw the need."




almost like a hobby."

understand what people see in all this artificial stimulation. i get high just walking in the woods."
"no caffeine always helps."

yes, i thought. reward my virture. give me life.


"then there's milk," i said. "people aren't  happy with the caffeine and the sugar.  they want the
milk too. all those fatty acids. haven't touched milk since i was a kid. haven't touched heavy cream. eat
bland  foods.  rarely  touch  hard  liquor.  never  knew  what  the  fuss  was  all  about.  water.  that's  my
beverage. a man can trust a glass of water."







my life. i've spent my life on a college campus. where does asbestos fit into this?"






deriving from minimal acceptable spillage exposure?"



consuming and controversial delving?






this substance can definitely lead to a mass."





i waited for him to tell me i was adding years to my life.
"speaking of water," he said, "have you ever been exposed to industrial contaminants?"
"what?"
"toxic material in the air or water."
"is this what you usually ask after the cigarettes?"
"it's not a scheduled question."
"you mean do i work with a substance like asbestos? absolutely not. i'm a teacher. teaching is

"have you ever heard of nyodene derivative?"
"should i have, based on the printout?"
"there are traces in your bloodstream."
"how can that be if i've never heard of it?"
"the magnetic scanner says it's there. i'm looking at bracketed numbers with little stars."
"are  you  saying  the  printout  shows  the  first  ambiguous  signs  of  a  barely  perceptible  condition

why was i speaking in this stilted fashion?
"the magnetic scanner is pretty clear," he said.
what had happened to our tacit agreement to advance smartly through the program without time-

"what happens when someone has traces of this material in his or her blood?"
"they get a nebulous mass," he said.
"but i thought no one knew for sure what nyodene d. did to humans. rats, yes."
"you just told me you'd never heard of it. how do you know what it does or doesn't do?"
he had me there. i felt i'd been tricked, carried along, taken for a fool.
"knowledge changes every day," he said. "we have some conflicting data that says exposure to

"the last stages of sleep? do you mean they wake up early in the morning and can't get back to

his confidence was soaring.
"good. let's get on to the next topic. i'm in something of a hurry."
"this is where i hand over the sealed envelope."
"is exercise next? the answer is none. hate it, refuse to do it."

 121

"we don't do potassium."
"good."
"good.  the  last  thing  i'm  supposed  to  tell  you  is  take  the  envelope  to  your  doctor.  your  doctor

"good. i am handing over the envelope."
"what is a nebulous mass, just out of idle curiosity?"
"a possible growth in the body."
"and it's called nebulous because you can't get a clear picture of it."
"we get very clear pictures. the imaging block takes the clearest pictures humanly possible. it's






called a nebulous mass because it has no definite shape, form or limits."
"what can it do in terms of worst-case scenario contingencies?"

"cause a person to die."

"speak english, for god's sake. i despise this modern jargon."

he took insults well. the angrier i got, the better he liked it. he radiated energy and health.


"now is where i tell you to pay in the outer office."

"what  about  potassium?  i  came  here  in  the  first  place  because  my  potassium  was  way  above
normal limits."



knows the symbols."
"so that's it then. good."

"good," he said.


i found myself shaking his hand warmly. minutes later i was out on the street. a boy walked splay-
footed across a public lawn, nudging a soccer ball before him. a second kid sat on the grass, taking off his
socks by grabbing the heels and yanking. how literary, i thought peevishly. streets thick with the details of
impulsive life as the hero ponders the latest phase in  his dying. it was a partially cloudy day with winds
diminishing toward sunset.

that  night  i  walked  the  streets  of  blacksmith.  the  glow  of  blue-eyed  tvs.  the  voices  on  the
touch-tone phones. far away the grandparents huddle in a chair, eagerly sharing the receiver as carrier
waves modulate into audible
signals. it is the voice of their grandson, the growing boy whose face appears in the snapshots set around
the phone. joy rushes to their eyes but it is misted over, infused with a sad and complex knowing. what is
the youngster saying to them? his wretched complexion makes him unhappy? he wants to leave school
and work full-time at foodland, bagging groceries? he tells them he likes to bag groceries. it is the one
thing in life he finds satisfying. put the gallon jugs in first, square off the six-packs, double-bag the heavy
merch.  he  does  it  well,  he  has  the  knack,  he  sees  the  items  arranged  in  the  bag  before  he  touches  a
thing. it's like zen, gramma. i snap out two bags, fit one inside the other. don't bruise the fruit, watch the
eggs, put the ice cream in a freezer bag. a thousand people pass me every day but no one ever sees me.
i like it, gramma, it's totally un-threatening, it's how i want to spend my life. and so they listen sadly, loving
him all the  more, their faces pressed against the sleek trimline,  the white  princess in the bedroom,  the
plain brown rotary in granddad's paneled basement  hideaway. the old gentleman runs a hand through
his  thatch  of  white  hair,  the  woman  holds  her  folded  specs  against  her  face.  clouds  race  across  the
westering moon, the seasons change in somber montage, going deeper into winter stillness, a landscape
of silence and ice. your doctor knows the symbols.


37

the  long  walk  started  at  noon.  i  didn't  know  it  would  turn  into  a  long  walk.  i  thought  it  would  be  a
miscellaneous  meditation,  murray  and  jack,  half  an  hour's  campus  meander.  but  it  became  a  major
afternoon, a serious looping socratic walk, with practical consequences.

i met murray after his car crash seminar and we wandered along the fringes of the campus, past
the cedar-shingled condominiums set in the trees in their familiar defensive posture--a cluster of dwellings
blending so well with the environment that birds kept flying into the plate-glass windows.
"you're smoking a pipe," i said.

murray smiled sneakily.

"it looks good. i like it. it works."


he  lowered  his  eyes,  smiling.  the  pipe  had  a  long  narrow  stem  and  cubical  bowl.  it  was  pale
brown and resembled a highly disciplined household implement, perhaps an amish or shaker antique. i
wondered if he'd chosen it to match his somewhat severe chin whiskers. a tradition of stern virtue seemed



122

"it's almost as though our fear is what brings it on. if we could learn not to be afraid, we could live

"well said."
what  did he  mean, well said? i  wanted him  to  argue  with  me, raise my dying  to a  higher  level,

"why can't we be intelligent about death?" i said.
"it's obvious."
"it is?"
"ivan  ilyich  screamed  for  three  days.  that's  about  as  intelligent  as  we  get.  tolstoy  himself

"no, you don't."
he puffed seriously on his pipe, his cheeks going hollow. we walked in silence for a while.
"do you think your death is premature?" he said.
"every  death  is  premature.  there's  no  scientific  reason  why  we  can't  live  a  hundred  and  fifty

to hover about his gestures and expressions.




struggled to understand. he feared it terribly."

forever."
"we talk ourselves into it. is that what you mean?"


"i don't know what i mean. i only know i'm just going through the motions of living. i'm technically
dead. my body is growing a nebulous mass. they track these things like satellites. all this as a result of a
byproduct of insecticide. there's something artificial about my death. it's shallow, unfulfilling. i don't belong
to the earth or sky. they ought to carve an aerosol can on my tombstone."


make me feel better.
"do you think it's unfair?" he said.

"of course i do. or is that a trite answer?"

he seemed to shrug.


"look how  i've lived. has my  life been a  mad dash  for pleasure?  have  i been hellbent on self-
destruction, using illegal drugs, driving fast cars, drinking to excess? a little dry sherry at faculty parties. i
eat bland foods."




years. some people actually do it, according to a headline i saw at the supermarket."

you still hope to accomplish. work to be done, intellectual challenges to be faced."

one issue here. i want to live."

convicted murderess. aggressive jazz score by johnny mandel."


you'd ever hoped to accomplish in your life and work."

"are you crazy? of course. that's an elitist idea. would you ask a man who bags groceries if he
fears death not because it is death but because there are still some interesting groceries he would like to
bag?"


seventy or eighty years."

"your status as a doomed man lends your words a certain prestige and authority. i like that. as
the time nears, i think you'll find that people will be eager to hear what you have to say. they will seek you
out."
"are you saying this is a wonderful opportunity for me to win friends?"


"i'm saying you can't let down the living by slipping into self-pity and despair. people will depend
on you to be brave. what people look for in a dying friend is a stubborn kind of gravel-voiced nobility, a
refusal  to  give  in,  with  moments  of  indomitable  humor.  you're  growing  in  prestige  even  as  we  speak.
you're creating a hazy light about your own body. i have to like it."

here were old and looming, set above narrow stone stairways in partial disrepair.



are those who are afraid of life?"



"do you believe love is stronger than death?"
"not in a million years."
"good," he said. "nothing is stronger than death. do you believe the only people who fear death

"that's crazy. completely stupid."
"right.  we  all  fear  death  to  some  extent.  those  who  claim  otherwise  are  lying  to  themselves.

"do you think it's a sense of incompleteness that causes you the deepest regret? there are things

"the deepest regret is death. the only thing to face is death. this is all i think about. there's only

"from  the  robert  wise  film  of  the  same  name,  with  susan  hayward  as  barbara  graham,  a

i looked at him.
"so  you're  saying,  jack,  that  death  would  be  just  as  threatening  even  if  you'd  accomplished  all

"well said."
"this is death. i don't want it to tarry awhile so i can write a monograph. i want it to go away for

we walked down the middle of a steep and winding street. there was no one around. the houses

 123

"no."
"no. there is no reason to believe life is more precious because it is fleeting. here is a statement.

"false. once your death is established, it becomes impossible to live a satisfying life."
"would you prefer to know the exact date and time of your death?"
"absolutely not. it's bad enough to fear the unknown. faced with the unknown, we can pretend it

"people with their nicknames on their license plates."
"excellent, jack. do you believe life without death is somehow incomplete?"
"how could it be incomplete? death is what makes it incomplete."
"doesn't our knowledge of death make life more precious?"
"what good is a preciousness based on fear and anxiety? it's an anxious quivering thing."¨
"true. the most deeply precious things are those we feel secure about. a wife, a child. does the

shallow people."






specter of death make a child more precious?"


a person has to be told he is going to die before he can begin to live life to the fullest. true or false?"



isn't there. exact dates would drive many to suicide, if only to beat the system."

we crossed an old highway bridge, screened in, littered with sad and faded objects. we followed
a  footpath  along  a  creek,  approached  the  edge  of  the  high  school  playing  field.  women  brought  small
children here to play in the long-jump pits.
"how do i get around it?" i said.


"you could put your faith in technology. it got you here, it can get you out. this is the whole point
of technology. it creates an appetite for immortality on the one hand. it threatens universal extinction on
the other. technology is lust removed from nature."

"it is?"

"it's what we invented to conceal the terrible secret of our decaying bodies. but it's also life, isn't
it? it prolongs life, it provides new organs for those that wear out. new devices, new techniques every day.
lasers, masers, ultrasound. give yourself up to it, jack. believe in it. they'll insert you in a gleaming tube,
irradiate your body with the basic stuff of the universe. light, energy, dreams. god's own goodness."




and so on. some gorgeous systems have evolved from these beliefs. study them."


birth, a second life, is practically universal. this must mean something."
"but these gorgeous systems are all so different."

"pick one you like."

"but you make it sound like a convenient fantasy, the worst kind of self-delusion."


again he seemed to shrug. 'think of the great poetry, the music and dance and ritual that spring
forth from our aspiring to a life beyond death. may be these things are justification enough for our hopes
and dreams, although i wouldn't say that to a dying man."

he  poked  me  with  an  elbow.  we  walked  toward  the  commercial  part  of  town.  murray  paused,
raised one foot behind him, reached back to knock some ashes from his pipe. then he pocketed the thing
expertly, inserting it bowl-first in his corduroy jacket.


beyond this life, out there, looming, in the dark?"

"what do you think the afterlife is, a body of facts just waiting to be uncovered? do you think the
u. s. air force is secretly gathering data on  the afterlife and keeping it under wraps because we're not
mature enough to accept the findings? the findings would cause panic? no. i'll tell you what the afterlife
is. it's a sweet and terribly touching idea. you can take it or leave it. in the meantime what you have to do
is survive an assassination attempt. that would be an instant tonic. you would feel specially favored, you
would grow in charisma."

me?"

once  more  he  shrugged.  survive  a  train  wreck  in  which  a  hundred  die.  get  thrown  clear  when
your single-engine cessna crashes on a golf course after striking a power line in heavy rain just minutes
after takeoff. it doesn't have to be assassination. the point is you're standing at the edge of a smoldering

"i don't think i want to see any doctors for a while, murray, thanks."
"in that case you can always get around death by concentrating on the life beyond."
"how do i do that?"
"it's obvious. read up on reincarnation, transmigration, hyperspace, the resurrection of the dead

"do you believe in any of these things?"
"millions of people have believed for thousands of years. throw in with them. belief in a second

"seriously, you can find a great deal of long-range solace in the idea of an afterlife."
"but don't i have to believe? don't  i have to feel in  my heart that there is something, genuinely,

"you  said  earlier  that  death  was  making  me  grow  in  charisma.  besides,  who  would  want  to  kill



124

"has your german helped?"
"i can't say it has."
"has it ever helped?"
"i can't say. i don't know. who knows these things?"
"what have you been trying to do all these years?"
"put myself under a spell, i guess."
"correct. nothing to be ashamed of, jack. it's only your fear that makes you act this way."
"only my fear? only my death?"
"we shouldn't be surprised at your lack of success. how powerful did the germans prove to be?

"that's what denise said."
"you've discussed this with the children?"
"superficially."
"helpless and fearful people are drawn to magical figures, mythic figures, epic men who intimidate

"you're talking about hitler, i take it."
"some people are larger than life. hitler is larger than death. you thought he would protect you. i

ruin where others lie inert and twisted. this can counteract the effect of any number of nebulous masses,
at least for a time."

we window-shopped a while, then went into a shoe store. murray looked at weejuns, wallabees,
hush puppies. we wandered out into the sun. children in strollers squinted up at us, appearing to think
we were something strange.









they lost the war, after all."




and darkly loom."


understand completely."
"do you? because i wish i did."


"it's  totally  obvious.  you  wanted  to  be  helped  and  sheltered.  the  over  whelming  horror  would
leave no room for your own death. 'submerge me,' you said. 'absorb my fear.' on one level you wanted to
conceal yourself in hitler and his works. on another level you wanted to use him to grow in significance
and strength. i sense a confusion of means. not that i'm criticizing. it was a daring thing you did, a daring
thrust. to use him. i can admire the attempt even as i see how totally dumb it was, although no dumber
than wearing a charm or knocking wood. six hundred million hindus stay home from work if the signs are
not favorable that morning. so i'm not singling you out." 'the vast and terrible depth."










you stood out on the one hand and tried to hide on the other. what is the name we give to this attempt?"
"dumb."


i followed him into the supermarket. blasts of color, layers of oceanic sound. we walked under a
bright  banner  announcing  a  raffle  to  raise  money  for  some  incurable  disease.  the  wording  seemed  to
indicate that the winner would get the disease. murray likened the banner to a tibetan prayer flag.
"why have i had this fear so long, so consistently?"


"it's obvious. you don't know how to repress. we're all aware there's no escape from death. how
do we deal with this crushing knowledge? we repress, we disguise, we bury, we exclude. some people
do it better than others, that's all."


disguising operations."

so cleverly disguised?"


packet of dehydrated soup. the data was strong today.

"of course," he said. "the inexhaustibility."
"i understand."
"the whole huge nameless thing."
"yes, absolutely."
"the massive darkness."
"certainly, certainly." 'the whole terrible endless hugeness."
"i know exactly what you mean."
he tapped the fender of a diagonally parked car, half smiling. "why have you failed, jack?"
"a confusion of means."
"correct. there are numerous ways to get around death. you tried to employ two of them at once.

"how can i improve?"
"you  can't.  some  people  just  don't  have  the  unconscious  tools  to  perform  the  necessary

"freud said so. speaking of looming figures."
he picked up a box of handi-wrap ii, reading the display type, studying the colors. he smelled a

"how do we know repression exists if the tools are unconscious and the thing we're repressing is

 125

i looked at him carefully.
"i exercise. i take care of my body."
"no, you don't," he said.
he helped an old man read the date on a loaf of raisin bread. children sailed by in silver carts.
"tegrin, denorex, selsun blue."
murray wrote something in his little book.  i watched him step deftly around a dozen  fallen eggs


"do  you  think  i'm  somehow  healthier  because  i  don't  know  how  to  repress?  is  it  possible  that
constant fear is the natural state of man and that by living close to my fear i am actually doing something
heroic, murray?"
"do you feel heroic?"

"no."

"then you probably aren't."

"but isn't repression unnatural?"


"fear  is  unnatural.  lightning  and  thunder  are  unnatural.  pain,  death,  reality,  these  are  all
unnatural.  we  can't  bear  these  things  as  they  are.  we  know  too  much.  so  we  resort  to  repression,
compromise  and  disguise.  this  is  how  we  survive  in  the  universe.  this  is  the  natural  language  of  the
species."






oozing yolky matter from a busted carton.
"why do i feel so good when i'm with wilder? it's not like being with the other kids," i said.

"you sense his total ego, his freedom from limits."

"in what way is he free from limits?"


"he  doesn't  know  he's  going  to  die.  he  doesn't  know  death  at  all.  you  cherish  this  simpleton
blessing of his, this exemption from harm. you want to get close to him, touch him, look at him, breathe
him  in. how  lucky he  is.  a cloud  of  unknowing,  an omnipotent  little person. the child is  everything, the
adult  nothing.  think  about  it.  a  person's  entire  life  is  the  unraveling  of  this  conflict.  no  wonder  we're
bewildered, staggered, shattered."
"aren't you going too far?"


"i'm from new york."
"we create beautiful and lasting things, build vast civilizations."

"gorgeous evasions," he said. "great escapes."


the  doors  parted  photoelectronically.  we  went  outside,  walking  past  the  dry  cleaner,  the
hairstylist, the optician. murray relighted his pipe, sucking impressively at the mouthpiece.

"we  have  talked  about  ways  to  get  around  death,"  he  said.  "we  have  discussed  how  you've
already  tried  two  such  ways,  each  cancelling  the  other.  we  have  mentioned  technology,  train  wrecks,
belief in an afterlife. there are other methods as well and i would like to talk about one such approach."

we crossed the street.

"i believe, jack, there are two kinds of people in the world. killers and diers. most of us are diers.
we don't have  the disposition,  the rage or whatever it takes to be a killer. we let death happen. we lie
down and die. but think what it's like  to be a killer. think how exciting it is, in theory, to kill a person in
direct confrontation. if he dies, you cannot. to kill him is to gain life-credit. the more people you kill, the
more credit you store up. it explains any number of massacres, wars, executions."

others?"

"it's obvious."

"and you call this exciting?"

"i'm talking theory. in theory, violence is a form of rebirth. the dier passively succumbs. the killer
lives  on.  what  a  marvelous  equation.  as  a  marauding  band  amasses  dead  bodies,  it  gathers  strength.
strength accumulates like a favor from the gods."


your opponent bleeding in the dust."
"you think it adds to a person's store of credit, like a bank transaction."


"nothingness is staring you in the face. utter and permanent oblivion. you will cease to be. to be,
jack.  the  dier  accepts  this  and  dies.  the  killer,  in  theory,  attempts  to  defeat  his  own  death  by  killing
others. he buys time, he buys life. watch others squirm. see the blood trickle in the dust."
i looked at him, amazed. he drew contentedly on his pipe, making hollow sounds.


"it's  a  way  of  controlling  death.  a  way  of  gaining  the  ultimate  upper  hand.  be  the  killer  for  a
change. let someone else be the dier. let him replace you, theoretically, in that role. you can't die if he

"are  you  saying  that  men  have  tried  throughout  history  to  cure  themselves  of  death  by  killing

"what does this have to do with me?"
"this is theory. we're a couple of academics taking a walk. but imagine the visceral jolt, seeing



126

"are you sure?" i said.
"to plot, to take aim at something, to shape time and space. this is how we advance the art of

does. he dies, you live. see how marvelously simple."


masses. kill to live."
"sounds pretty awful."

he seemed to shrug. "slaughter is never random. the more people you kill, the more power you

gain  over  your  own  death.  there  is  a  secret  precision  at  work  in  the  most  savage  and  indiscriminate
killings. to speak about this is not to do public relations for murder. we're two academics in an intellectual
environment. it's our duty to examine currents of thought, investigate the meaning of human behavior. but
think how exciting, to come out a winner in a deathly struggle, to watch the bastard bleed."

know it or not."
"to plot is to live," he said.

i looked at him. i studied his face, his hands.

"we start our lives in chaos, in babble. as we surge up into the world, we try to devise a shape, a

plan. there is dignity in this. your whole life is a plot, a scheme, a diagram. it is a failed scheme but that's
not the point. to plot is to affirm life, to seek shape and control. even after death, most particularly after
death, the search continues. burial rites are an attempt to complete the scheme, in ritual. picture a state
funeral, jack. it is all precision, detail, order, design. the nation holds its breath. the efforts of a huge and
powerful government are brought to bear on a ceremony that will shed the last trace of chaos. if all goes
well, if they bring it off, some natural law of perfection is obeyed. the nation is delivered from anxiety, the
deceased's life is redeemed, life itself is strengthened, reaffirmed."


human consciousness."

we  moved  in  a  wide  arc  back  toward  campus.  streets  in  deep  and  soundless  shade,  garbage
bags set out for collection. we crossed the sunset overpass, pausing briefly to watch the cars shoot by.
sunlight bouncing off the glass and chrome.





there a fund, a pool, a reservoir of potential violence in the male psyche?"
"in theory i suppose there is."


"we're talking theory. that's exactly what we're talking. two friends on a tree-shaded street. what
else  but  theory?  isn't  there  a  deep  field,  a  sort  of  crude  oil  deposit  that  one  might  tap  if  and  when  the
occasion warrants? a great dark lake of male rage."




when dinosaurs roamed the earth and men fought with flint tools? when to kill was to live?"


unassuming soul."




you've always known at some basic level."
"are you saying a dier can become a killer?"


"i'm  only  a  visiting  lecturer.  i  theorize,  i  take  walks,  i  admire  the  trees  and  houses.  i  have  my
students,  my  rented  room,  my  tv  set.  i  pick  out  a  word  here,  an  image  there.  i  admire  the  lawns,  the
porches. what a wonderful thing a porch is. how did i live a life without a porch to sit on, up till now? i s
peculate, i reflect, i take constant notes. i am here to think, to see. let me warn you, jack. i won't let up."
we passed my street and walked up the hill to the campus.


"are you a killer or a dier, jack?"
"you know the answer to that. i've been a dier all my life."
"what can you do about it?"
"what can any dier do? isn't it implicit in his makeup that he can't cross over?"
"let's think about that. let's examine the nature of the beast, so to speak. the male animal. isn't

"that's what babette says. homicidal rage. you sound like her."
"amazing lady. is she right or wrong?"
"in theory? she's probably right."
"isn't  there  a  sludgy  region  you'd  rather  not  know  about?  a  remnant  of  some  prehistoric  period

"babette talks about male biology. is it biology or geology?"
"does it matter, jack? we only want to know whether it is there, buried in the most prudent and

"i suppose so. it can be. it depends."
"is it or isn't it there?"
"it's there, murray. so what?"
"i only want  to hear you say it. that's all. i only want  to elicit truths you already possess,  truths

"you say this is what people have been doing for centuries."
"they're still doing it. they do it on a small  intimate scale,  they do it in  groups and crowds and

"plot a murder, you're saying. but every plot is a  murder in effect. to plot is to die, whether we

"who's your doctor?"

 127

"everyone but my wife. she wants to die first."
"don't be so sure," he said.
we shook hands in front of the library. i thanked him for his honesty.
"that's what it all comes down to in the end," he said. "a person spends his life saying good-bye

"chakravarty," i said.
"is he good?"
"how would i know?"
"my shoulder separates. an old sexual injury."
"i'm afraid to see him. i put the printout of my death in the bottom drawer of a dresser."
"i know how you  feel.  but the  tough part is yet to come. you've said good-bye to everyone but







yourself. how does a person say good-bye to himself? it's a juicy existential dilemma."
"it certainly is."

we walked past the administration building.

"i hate to be the one who says it, jack, but there's something that has to be said."

"what?"

"better you than me."

i nodded gravely. "why does this have to be said?"

"because friends have to be brutally honest with each other.

i'd feel terrible if i didn't tell you what i was thinking, especially at a time like this."

"i appreciate it, murray. i really do."


"besides, it's part of the universal experience of dying. whether you think about it consciously or
not,  you're  aware  at  some  level  that  people  are  walking  around  saying  to  themselves,  'better  him  than
me.' it's only natural. you can't blame them or wish them ill."




to other people. how does he say good-bye to himself?"

i threw away picture-frame wire, metal book ends, cork coasters, plastic key tags, dusty bottles of
mercurochrome and vaseline, crusted paintbrushes, caked shoe brushes, clotted correction fluid. i threw
away candle stubs, laminated placemats, frayed pot holders. i went after the padded clothes hangers, the
magnetic memo clipboards. i was in a vengeful and near savage state. i bore a personal grudge against
these things. somehow they'd put me in this fix. they'd dragged me down, made escape impossible. the
two girls followed me around, observing a respectful silence. i threw away my battered khaki canteen, my
ridiculous hip boots. i threw away diplomas, certificates, awards and citations. when the girls stopped me,
i was working the bathrooms, discarding used bars of soap, damp towels, shampoo bottles with streaked
labels and missing caps.

please note. in several days, your new automated banking card will arrive in the mail. if it is a
red card with a silver stripe, your secret code will be the same as it is now. if it is a green card with a gray
stripe,  you  must  appear  at  your  branch,  with  your  card,  to  devise  a  new  secret  code.  codes  based  on
birthdays are popular. warning. do not write down your code. do not carry your code on your person.
remember.  you  cannot  access  your  account  unless  your  code  is  entered  properly.  know  your  code.
reveal your code to no one. only your code allows you to enter the system.


38

my head was between her breasts, where it seemed to be spending a lot of time lately. she stroked my
shoulder.
"murray says the problem is that we don't repress our fear."

"repress it?"

"some people have the gift, some don't."


"the gift? i thought repression was outdated. they've been telling us for years not to repress our
fears and desires. repression causes tension, anxiety, unhappiness, a hundred diseases and conditions.
i thought  the last thing we were supposed to do was repress something.  they've been  telling us to talk
about our fears, get in touch with our feelings."

repress, those of us who know how."

deny our nature."


"getting  in  touch  with  death  is  not  what  they  had  in  mind.  death  is  so  strong  that  we  have  to

"but  repression  is  totally  false  and  mechanical.  everybody  knows  that.  we're  not  supposed  to

"it's natural  to deny our nature, according  to  murray.  it's  the whole point of being different from



128

"they said it was not humane. there was no place that would let him do it officially. he had to go

that evening i heard heinrich in his room, moodily singing "the streets of laredo." i stopped in to

animals."
"but that's crazy."

"it's the only way to survive," i said from her breasts.


she  stroked  my  shoulder,  thinking  about  this.  cray  flashes  of  a  staticky  man  standing  near  a
double  bed.  his  body  distorted,  rippling,  unfinished.  i  didn't  have  to  imagine  his  motel  companion.  our
bodies  were  one  surface,  hers  and  mine,  but  the  delectations  of  touch  were  preempted  by  mr.  gray.  it
was  his  pleasure  i  experienced,  his  hold  over  babette,  his  cheap  and  sleazy  power.  down  the  hall  an
eager  voice  said:  "if  you  keep  misplacing  your  ball  of  string,  cage  it  in  a  barney  basket,  attach  some
organizer clips to your kitchen corkboard, fasten the basket to the clips. simple!"

the next day i started carrying the zumwalt automatic to school. it was in the flap pocket of my
jacket when i lectured, it was in the top drawer of my desk when i received visitors in the office. the gun
created a second reality for me to inhabit. the air was bright, swirling around my head. nameless feelings
pressed thrillingly on my chest. it was a reality i could control, secretly dominate.
how stupid these people were, coming into my office unarmed.

late  one  afternoon  i  took  the  gun  out  of  my  desk  and  examined  it  carefully.  only  three  bullets

remained  in  the  magazine.  i  wondered  how  vernon  dickey  had  used  the  missing  ammo  (or  whatever
bullets are called by people familiar with firearms). four dylar tablets, three zumwalt bullets. why was i
surprised to find that the bullets were so unmistakably bullet-shaped? i guess i thought new names and
shapes had been given to just about everything in the decades since i first became aware of objects and
their functions. the weapon was gun-shaped, the little pointed projectiles reassuringly bullet-shaped. they
were like childhood things you might come across after forty years, seeing their genius for the first time.

ask whether orest had entered the cage yet.

underground."
"where is underground?"


"watertown. orest and his trainer. they found a public notary there who said he would certify a
document  that said  that  orest  mercator spent so  many days incarcerated with  these venomous reptiles
blah blah blah."
"where would they find a large glass cage in watertown?"

"they wouldn't."

"what would they find?"

"a room in the only hotel. plus there were only three snakes. and he got bit in four minutes."

"you mean the hotel let them place poisonous snakes in the room?"


"the hotel didn't know. the man who arranged  the snakes carried  them up in an airline bag. it
was  a  whole  massive  deception  except  the  man  showed  up  with  three  snakes  instead  of  the  agreed
twenty-seven."
"in other words he told them he had access to twenty-seven snakes."

"venomous. except they weren't. so orest got bit for nothing. the jerk."

"suddenly he's a jerk."

"they had all this antivenom which they couldn't even use. the first four minutes."

"how does he feel?"

"how would you feel if you were a jerk?"

"glad to be alive," i said.


"not orest. he dropped out of sight. he went into complete seclusion. nobody's seen him since it
happened. he doesn't answer the door, he doesn't answer the phone, he doesn't show up at school. the
total package."

i decided to wander over to my office and glance at some final exams. most of the students had
already departed, eager to begin the routine hedonism of another bare-limbed summer. the campus was
dark and empty. there was a trembling mist. passing a line of trees, i thought i sensed someone edge in
behind me, maybe thirty yards away. when i looked, the path was clear. was it the gun that was making
me jumpy? does a gun draw violence to it, attract other guns to its surrounding field of force? i walked on
quickly  toward  centenary  hall.  i  heard  footsteps  on  gravel,  a  conspicuous  crunch.  someone  was  out
there, on the edge of the parking area, in the trees and the mist. if i had a gun, why was i scared? if i was
scared, why didn't i run? i counted off five paces, looked quickly left, saw a figure moving parallel to the
path, in and out of deep shadow. i broke into a shambling trot, my gun hand in my pocket, clutching the
automatic.  when  i  looked  again,  he  wasn't  there.  i  slowed  down  warily,  crossed  a  broad  lawn,  heard
running, the meter of bounding feet. he was coming from the right this time, all-out, closing fast. i broke

 129

"why deepest secrecy?"
"it's obvious. to prevent espionage by competitive  giants. the point is  they came very close  to

"i'll bet i know the first thing he does. he runs an ad in a gossip tabloid asking for volunteers for a

"hi, jack. at first i didn't know who it was, so i used evasive tactics. when i realized it was you, i

"how come?"
"remember that  time you asked me about a secret research group? working on fear of death?

into a weaving run, hoping  i'd  make an  elusive target for someone  firing at  my back.  i'd  never run in a
weave before. i kept my head down, swerved sharply and unpredictably. it was an interesting way to run. i
was  surprised  at  the  range  of  possibilities,  the  number  of  combinations  i  could  put  together  within  a
framework of left and right swerves. i did a tight left, widened it, cut sharply right, faked left, went left, went
wide right. about twenty yards from the end of the open area, i broke off the weave pattern and ran as fast
and straight as i could for a red oak. i stuck out my left arm, went skidding around the tree in a headlong
cranking countermotion, simultaneously using my right hand to pluck the zumwalt from my jacket pocket,
so that i now faced the person i'd been fleeing, protected by a tree trunk, my gun at the ready.

this  was  about  as  deft  a  thing  as  i'd  ever  done.  i  looked  into  the  heavy  mist  as  my  attacker
approached in little thudding footfalls. when i saw the familiar odd loping stride, i put the gun back in my
pocket. it was winnie richards, of course.

said to myself that's just the person i want to see."


trying to perfect a medication?"
"sure--dylar."


"there was a journal lying around the office yesterday. american psychobiologist. curious story in
there.  such  a  group  definitely  existed.  supported  by  a  multinational  giant.  operating  in  the  deepest
secrecy in an unmarked building just outside iron city."


achieving their objective."

"what happened?"

"a lot of things. the resident organizational genius, one of  the  forces behind the whole project,
was  a  fellow  named  willie  mink.  he  turns  out  to  be  a  controversial  fellow.  he  does  some  very,  very
controversial things."

hazardous experiment. fear of death, it says."

"very  good,  jack.  a  little  ad  in  some  rinky-dink  newspaper.  he  interviews  the  respondents  in  a
motel room, testing them for emotional integration and about a dozen other things in an attempt to work
up  a  death  profile  for  each  person.  interviews  in  a  motel.  when  the  scientists  and  the  lawyers  find  out
about this, they go slightly berserk, they reprimand mink, they put all their resources into computer testing.
berserk official reaction."
"but that's not the end of it."


"how  right  you  are.  despite  the  fact  that  mink  is  now  a  carefully  observed  person,  one  of  the
volunteers  manages  to  slip  through  the  screen  of  watchfulness  and  begins  a  program  of  more  or  less
unsupervised  human  experimentation,  using  a  drug  that  is  totally  unknown,  untested  and  unapproved,
with side effects that could beach a whale. ah unsupervised well-built human."
"female," i said.

"very  correct.  she  periodically  reports  to  mink  in  the  very  motel  where  he  originally  did  his

interviewing,  sometimes  arriving  in  a  taxi,  sometimes  on  foot  from  the  shabby  and  depressing  bus
terminal. what is she wearing, jack?"
"i don't know."


"a  ski  mask.  she  is  the  woman  in  the  ski  mask.  when  the  others  find  out  about  mink's  latest
caper, there is a period of prolonged controversy, animosity, litigation and disgrace. pharmaceutical giants
have their code of ethics,  just like you and me. the  project  manager is kicked out, the project goes on
without him."


place."








"where is the motel?"
"in germantown."
"where's that?" i said.
"iron city. it's the old german section. behind the foundry."
"i didn't know there was a section in iron city called germantown."
'the germans are gone, of course."
i went straight  home. denise was  making check  marks in a paperback book called  directory of

"did the article say what happened to him?"
"the  reporter  tracked  him  down.  he  is  living  in  the  same  motel  where  all  the  controversy  took



130

"no one will convince me that the person i know as babette actually wants to run up the stadium

"it's not what i want, it's what i need. my life is no longer in the realm of want. i do what i have to

she said, "i can't walk to the stadium, run up the steps five or six times and then walk all the way

"i don't want it. what do you think of that? you want the car. you take it. the streets are slippery.

"it's my life. i tend to be involved."
"it's not your life. it's only exercise."
"a runner needs," she said.
"i also need and tonight i need the car. don't wait up for me. who knows when i'll be back."
i  waited  for  her  to  ask  what  mysterious  mission  would  require  me  to  get  in  the  car  and  drive

"maybe i'm wearing running clothes for a reason."
"like what?"
"i'm going running," she said. "is that a good idea? at night?"
"what is night? it happens seven times a week. where is the uniqueness in this?"
"it's dark, it's wet."
"do we live in a blinding desert glare? what is wet? we live with wet."
"babette doesn't speak like this."
"does life have to stop because our half of the earth is dark? is there something about the night

toll-free numbers. i found babette sitting by wilder's bed, reading him a story.
"i don't mind running clothes as such," i said. "a sweatsuit is a practical thing to wear at times. but

i  wish  you  wouldn't  wear  it  when  you  read  bedtime  stories  to  wilder  or  braid  steffie's  hair.  there's
something touching about such moments that is jeopardized by running clothes."








that physically resists a runner? i need to pant and gasp. what is dark? it's just another name for light."

steps at ten o'clock at night."

do. i pant, i gasp. every runner understands the need for this."

"why do you have to run up steps? you're not a professional athlete trying to rebuild a shattered
knee.  run  on  plain  land.  don't  make  a  major  involvement  out  of  it.  everything  is  a  major  involvement
today."





through the rain-streaked night, time of return unknown.

back home. you can drive me there, wait for me, drive me back. the car is then yours."

you know what that means, don't you?"
"what does it mean?"

"fasten your seat belt. there's also a chill in the air. you know what a chill in the air means."

"what does it mean?"

"wear your ski mask," i told her.

the thermostat began to buzz.


i put on a jacket and went outside. ever since the airborne toxic event, our neighbors, the stovers,
had been keeping their car in the driveway instead of the garage, keeping it facing the street, keeping the
key  in  the  ignition.  i  walked  up  the  driveway  and  got  in  the  car.  there  were  trash  caddies  fixed  to  the
dashboard  and  seat-backs,  dangling  plastic  bags  full  of  gum  wrappers,  ticket  stubs,  lipstick-smeared
tissues, crumpled soda cans, crumpled circulars and receipts, ashtray debris, popsicle sticks and french
fries, crumpled coupons and paper napkins, pocket combs with missing teeth. thus familiarized, i started
up the engine, turned on the lights and drove off.

i ran a red light when i crossed middlebrook. reaching the end of the expressway ramp, i did not
yield. all the way to iron city, i felt a sense of dreaminess, release, unreality. i slowed down at the toll gate
but did not bother tossing a quarter into the basket. an alarm went off but no one pursued. what's another
quarter  to  a  state  that  is  billions  in  debt?  what's  twenty-five  cents  when  we  are  talking  about  a  nine-
thousand-dollar stolen car? this must be how people escape the pull of the earth, the gravitational leaf-
flutter  that  brings  us  hourly  closer  to  dying.  simply  stop  obeying.  steal  instead  of  buy,  shoot  instead  of
talk. i ran two more lights on the rainy approach roads to iron city. the outlying buildings were long and
low, fish and produce markets, meat terminals with old wooden canopies. i entered the city and turned on
the  radio,  needing  company  not  on  the  lonely  highway  but  here  on  the  cobbled  streets,  in  the  sodium
vapor  lights,  where  the  emptiness  clings.  every  city  has  its  districts.  i  drove  past  the  abandoned  car
district, the uncollected garbage district, the sniper-fire district, the districts of smoldering sofas and broken
glass. ground glass crunched under the tires. i headed toward the foundry.
random access memory, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, mutual assured destruction.


i  still  felt  extraordinarily  light--lighter  than  air,  colorless,  odorless,  invisible.  but  around  the
lightness and dreaminess, something else was building, an emotion of a different order. a surge, a will, an
agitation of the passions. i reached into my pocket, rubbed my knuckles across the grainy stainless steel

 131

there was an aluminum awning over the office door.  on the  door itself were little plastic letters

of the zumwalt barrel. the man on the radio said: "void where prohibited."


39

i drove twice around the foundry, looking for signs of some erstwhile german presence. i drove past the
row houses. they were set on a steep hill, narrow-fronted frame houses, a climbing line of pitched roofs. i
drove past the bus terminal, through the beating rain. it took a while to find the motel, a one-story building
set against the concrete pier of an elevated roadway. it was called the roadway motel.

transient pleasures, drastic measures.

the area was deserted, a spray-painted district of warehouses and light industry. the motel had
nine or ten rooms, all dark, no cars out front. i drove past three times, studying the scene, and parked half
a block away, in the rubble under the roadway. then i walked back to the motel. those were the first three
elements in my plan.

here is my plan. drive past the scene several times, park some distance from the scene, go back
on foot, locate mr. gray under his real name or an alias, shoot him three times in the viscera for maximum
pain, clear the weapon of prints, place the weapon in the victim's staticky hand, find a crayon or lipstick
tube and scrawl a cryptic suicide note on the full-length mirror, take the victim's supply of dylar tablets, slip
back to the car, proceed to the expressway entrance, head east toward blacksmith, get off at the old river
road, park stover's car in old man treadwell's garage, shut the garage door, walk home in the rain and
the fog.

elegant. my airy mood returned. i was advancing in consciousness. i watched myself take each
separate  step.  with  each  separate  step,  i  became  aware  of  processes,  components,  things  relating  to
other things. water fell to earth in drops. i saw things new.

arranged in slots to spell out a message. the message was: nu mish boot zup ko.

gibberish but high-quality gibberish. i made my way along the wall, looking through the windows.
my  plan  was  this.  stand  at  the  edges  of  windows  with  my  back  to  the  wall,  swivel  my  head  to  look
peripherally into rooms. some windows were bare, some had blinds or dusty shades. i could make out the
rough outlines of chairs or beds in the dark rooms. trucks rumbled overhead. in the next to last unit, there
was the scantest flicker of light. i stood at the edge of the window, listening. i swiveled my head, looked
into the room out of the corner of my right eye. a figure sat in a low armchair looking up at the flickering
light. i sensed i was part of a network of structures and channels. i knew the precise nature of events. i
was moving closer to things in their actual state as i approached a violence, a smashing intensity. water
fell in drops, surfaces gleamed.

it occurred to me that i did not have to knock. the door would be open. i gripped the knob, eased
the door open, slipped into the room.  stealth. it was easy. everything would be easy.  i stood inside the
room, sensing things, noting the room tone, the dense air. information rushed toward me, rushed slowly,
incrementally.  the  figure  was  male,  of  course,  and  sat  sprawled  in  the  short-legged  chair.  he  wore  a
hawaiian shirt and budweiser shorts. plastic sandals dangled from his feet. the dumpy chair, the rumpled
bed, the industrial carpet, the shabby dresser, the sad green walls and ceiling cracks. the tv floating in
the air, in a metal brace, pointing down at him.





forgettable face.



watching tv without the sound.






he spoke first, without taking his eyes from the flickering screen.
"are you heartsick or soulsick?"
i stood against the door.
"you're mink," i said.
in  time  he  looked  at  me,  looked  at  the  large  friendly  figure  with  the  slumped  shoulders  and

"what kind of name is willie mink?" i said.
"it's a first name and a last name. same as anybody."
did  he  speak  with  an  accent?  his  face  was  odd,  concave,  forehead  and  chin  jutting.  he  was

"some of these sure-footed bighorns have been equipped with radio transmitters," he said.
i could feel the pressure and density of things. so much was happening.
i sensed molecules active in my brain, moving along neural pathways.
"you're here for some dylar, of course."
"of course. what else?"



132

"to  begin  your  project  sweater,"  he  said,  "first  ask  yourself  what  type  sleeve  will  meet  your

i agreed completely. it made perfect sense. what was i here for if not to define, fix in my sights,

"what else? rid the fear."

"rid the fear. clear the grid."

"clear the grid. that's why they come to me."


this was my plan. enter unannounced, gain his confidence, wait for an unguarded moment, take
out the zumwalt, shoot him three times in the viscera for maximum slowness of agony, put the gun in his
hand  to  suggest  a  lonely  man's  suicide,  write  semi-coherent  things  on  the  mirror,  leave  stover's  car  in
treadwell's garage.
"by coming in here, you agree to a certain behavior," mink said.

"what behavior?"


"room behavior. the point of rooms is that they're inside. no one should go into a room unless he
understands this. people behave one way in rooms, another way in streets, parks and airports. to enter a
room is to agree to a certain kind of behavior. it follows that this would be the kind of behavior that takes
place in rooms. this is the standard, as opposed to parking lots and beaches. it is the point of rooms. no
one should enter a room not knowing the point. there is an unwritten agreement between the person who
enters a room and the person whose room had been entered, as opposed to open-air theaters, outdoor
pools. the purpose of a room derives from the special nature of a room. a room is inside. this is what
people in rooms have to agree on, as differentiated from lawns, meadows, fields, orchards."

take aim at? i heard a noise, faint, monotonous, white.

needs."

his  nose  was  flat,  his  skin  the  color  of  a  planter's  peanut.  what  is  the  geography  of  a  spoon-
shaped face? was he melanesian, polynesian, indonesian, nepalese, surinamese, dutch-chinese? was
he  a  composite?  how  many  people  came  here  for  dylar?  where  was  surinam?  how  was  my  plan
progressing?

i studied the palm-studded print of his loose shirt, the budweiser pattern repeated on the surface
of his bermuda shorts. the shorts were too big. the eyes were half closed. the hair was long and spiky-.
he  was  sprawled  in  the  attitude  of  a  stranded  air  traveler,  someone  long  since  defeated  by  the  stale
waiting, the airport babble. i began to feel sorry for babette. this had been her last hope for refuge and
serenity, this weary pulse of a man, a common pusher now, spiky-haired, going mad in a dead motel.

auditory  scraps,  tatters,  whirling  specks.  a  heightened  reality.  a  denseness  that  was  also  a
transparency. surfaces gleamed. water struck the roof in spherical  masses, globules, splashing drams.
close to a violence, close to a death.
"the pet under stress may need a prescription diet," he said.


of course he hadn't always been like this. he'd been  a project  manager, dynamic, hard-driving.
even  now  i  could  see  in  his  face  and  eyes  the  faltering  remains  of  an  enterprising  shrewdness  and
intelligence. he reached into his pocket, took a handful of white tablets, tossed them in the direction of his
mouth. some entered, some flew past. the saucer-shaped pills. the end of fear.
"where are you from originally, if i can call you willie?"


he lapsed into thought, trying to recall. i wanted to put him at ease, get him to talk about himself,
about dylar. part and parcel of my plan. my plan was this. swivel my head to look into rooms, put him at
his ease, wait for an unguarded moment, blast him in the gut three times for maximum efficiency of pain,
take his dylar, get off at the river road, shut the garage door, walk home in the rain and the fog.

"i wasn't always as you see me now."

"that's exactly what i was thinking."

"i was  doing important work. i envied  myself. i was literally embarked. death without  fear is an
everyday thing. you can live with it. i learned english watching american tv. i had american sex the first
time in port-o-san, texas. everything they said was true. i wish i could remember."

it, accept its inevitability."

hand will actually make the gold-leafing stick to the wax paper."
"there will eventually be an effective medication, you're saying. a remedy for fear."

"followed  by  a  greater  death.  more  effective,  productwise.  this  is  what  the  scientists  don't

understand, scrubbing their smocks with woolite. not that i have anything personal against death from our
vantage point high atop metropolitan county stadium."



"are you saying death adapts? it eludes our attempts to reason with it?"
this was similar to something murray had once said. murray had also said, "imagine the visceral

"you're saying there is no death as we know it without the element of fear. people would adjust to

"dylar failed, reluctantly. but it will definitely come. maybe now, maybe never. the heat from your

 133

jolt, watching your opponent bleed in the dust. he dies, you live."
close to a death, close to the slam of metal projectiles on flesh, the visceral jolt. i watched mink

ingest more pills, throwing them at his face, sucking them like sweets, his eyes on the flickering screen.
waves, rays, coherent beams. i saw things new.
"just between you and i," he said, "i eat this stuff like candy."

"i was just thinking that."

"how much do you want to buy?"

"how much do i need?"


"i see you as a heavyset white man about fifty. does this describe your anguish? i see you as a
person in a gray jacket and light brown pants. tell me how correct i am. to convert fahrenheit to celsius,
this is what you do."

there was a silence. things began to  glow. the dumpy chair, the shabby dresser,  the rumpled
bed. the bed was equipped with casters. i thought, this is the grayish figure of my torment, the man who
took my wife. did she wheel him around the room as he sat on the bed popping pills? did each lie prone
along  one  side  of  the  bed,  reaching  an  arm  down  to  paddle?  did  they  make  the  bed  spin  with  their
lovemaking, a froth of pillows and sheets above the small wheels on swivels? look at him now, glowing in
the dark, showing a senile grin.

"i barely forget the times i had in this room," he said, "before i became misplaced. there was a
woman in a ski mask, which her name escapes me at the moment. american sex, let me tell you, this is
how i learned my english."

the air was rich with extrasensory material. nearer to death, nearer to second sight. a smashing
intensity. i advanced two steps toward the middle of the room. my plan was elegant. advance gradually,
gain his confidence, take out the zumwalt, fire three bullets at his midsection for maximum visceral agony,
clear the weapon of prints, write suicidal cult messages on the mirrors and walls, take his supply of dylar,
slip back to the car, drive to the expressway entrance, head east toward blacksmith, leave stover's car in
treadwell's garage, walk home in the rain and the fog.

he gobbled more pills, flung others down the front of his budweiser shorts. i advanced one step.
there were cracked dylar tablets all over the fireretardant carpet. trod upon, stomped. he tossed some
tablets at the screen. the set had a walnut veneer with silvery hardware. the picture rolled badly.

turp, i will thicken the paint on my palette."

plane."
he looked at me, gripping the arms of the chair, the first signs of panic building in his eyes.

"plunging aircraft," i said, pronouncing the words crisply, authoritatively.


he  kicked  off  his  sandals,  folded  himself  over  into  the  recommended  crash  position,  head  well
forward,  hands  clasped  behind  his  knees.  he  performed  the  maneuver  automatically,  with  a  double-
jointed collapsible dexterity, throwing himself into it, like a child or a mime. interesting. the drug not only
caused the user to confuse words with the things they referred to; it made him act in a somewhat stylized
way.  i  watched  him  slumped  there,  trembling.  this  was  my  plan.  look  peripherally  into  rooms,  enter
unannounced, reduce him to trembling, gut-shoot him maximally three times, get off at the river road, shut
the garage door.

i  took  another  step  toward  the  middle  of  the  room.  as  the  tv  picture  jumped,  wobbled,  caught
itself  in  snarls,  mink  appeared  to  grow  more  vivid.  the  precise  nature  of  events.  things  in  their  actual
state. eventually he worked himself out of the deep fold, rising nicely, sharply outlined against the busy
air. white noise everywhere.

language of aviation. why are you here, white man?"






equipped with radio transmitters. their far-flung wanderings may tell us things."

i continued  to advance in consciousness.  things glowed, a secret life rising out of them. water
struck the roof in elongated orbs, splashing drams. i knew for the first time what rain really was. i knew
what wet was. i understood the neurochemistry of my brain, the meaning of dreams (the waste material of

"to buy."
"you are very white, you know that?"
"it's because i'm dying."
"this stuff fix you up."
"i'll still die."
"but  it won't  matter, which comes to  the same  thing.  some of these  playful dolphins have been

"containing  iron,  niacin  and  riboflavin.  i  learned  my  english  in  airplanes.  it's  the  international

"now i am picking up my  metallic gold tube,"  he said. "using my  palette knife and my  odorless

i  recalled  babette's  remarks  about  the  side  effects  of  the  medication.  i  said,  as  a  test,  "falling



134

premonitions).  great  stuff  everywhere,  racing  through  the  room,  racing  slowly.  a  richness,  a  density.  i
believed everything. i was a buddhist, a jain, a duck river baptist. my only sadness was babette, having
to kiss a scooped-out face.

"she wore the ski mask so as not to kiss my face, which she said was un-american. i told her a
room  is  inside.  do  not  enter  a  room  not  agreeing  to  this.  this  is  the  point,  as  opposed  to  emerging
coastlines, continental plates. or you can eat natural  grains, vegetables, eggs, no  fish, no fruit. or fruit,
vegetables, animal proteins, no grains, no milk. or lots of soybean milk for b-12 and lots of vegetables to
regulate insulin release but no meat, no fish, no fruit. or white meat but no red meat. or b-12 but no eggs.
or eggs but no grains. there are endless workable combinations."

i  was  ready  to  kill  him  now.  but  i  didn't  want  to  compromise  the  plan.  the  plan  was  elaborate.
drive past the scene several times, approach the motel on foot, swivel my head to look peripherally into
rooms, locate mr. gray under his real name, enter unannounced, gain his confidence, advance gradually,
reduce him to trembling, wait for an unguarded moment, take out the .25-caliber zumwalt automatic, fire
three bullets into his viscera for maximum slowness, depth and intensity of pain, wipe the weapon clear of
prints,  place  the  weapon  in  the  victim's  hand  to  suggest  the  trite  and  predictable  suicide  of  a  motel
recluse,  smear  crude  words  on  the  walls  in  the  victim's  own  blood  as  evidence  of  his  final  cult-related
frenzy, take his supply of dylar, slip back to the car, take the expressway to blacksmith, leave stover's car
in treadwell's garage, shut the garage door, walk home in the rain and the fog.
i advanced into the area of flickering light, out of the shadows, seeking to loom. i put my hand in

my pocket, gripped the firearm. mink watched the screen. i said to him gently, "hail of bullets." keeping
my hand in my pocket.

he  hit  the  floor,  began  crawling  toward  the  bathroom,  looking  back  over  his  shoulder,  childlike,
miming, using principles of heightened design but showing real terror, brilliant cringing fear. i followed him
into  the  toilet,  passing  the  full-length  mirror  where  he'd  undoubtedly  posed  with  babette,  his  shaggy
member dangling like a ruminant's.
"fusillade," i whispered.


he tried to wriggle behind the bowl, both arms over his head, his legs tight together. i loomed in
the  doorway,  conscious  of  looming,  seeing  myself  from  mink's  viewpoint,  magnified,  threatening.  it  was
time to tell him who i was. this was part of my plan. my plan was this. tell him who i am, let him know the
reason for his slow and agonizing death. i revealed my name, explained my relationship with the woman
in the ski mask.

he put his hands over  his crotch, tried  to  fit himself under the  toilet tank, behind  the  bowl.  the
intensity  of  the  noise  in  the  room  was  the  same  at  all  frequencies.  sound  all  around.  i  took  out  the
zumwalt.  great  and  nameless  emotions  thudded  on  my  chest.  i  knew  who  i  was  in  the  network  of
meanings. water fell to earth in drops, causing surfaces to gleam. i saw things new.

mink took one hand from his crotch, grabbed more tablets from his pocket, hurled them toward his
open mouth. his face appeared at the end of the white room, a white buzz, the inner surface of a sphere.
he sat up, tearing open his shirt pocket to find more pills. his fear was beautiful. he said to me, "did you
ever wonder why, out of thirty-two teeth, these four cause so much trouble? i'll be back with the answer in
a minute."
i  fired  the gun,  the weapon,  the  pistol, the  firearm, the automatic.  the sound snowballed in the

white room, adding on reflected waves. i watched blood squirt from the victim's midsection. a delicate arc.
i marveled at the rich color, sensed the color-causing action of non nucleated cells. the flow diminished to
a  trickle,  spread  across  the  tile  floor.  i  saw  beyond  words.  i  knew  what  red  was,  saw  it  in  terms  of
dominant wavelength, luminance, purity. mink's pain was beautiful, intense.

i fired a second shot just to fire it, relive the experience, hear the sonic waves layering through the
room,  feel  the  jolt  travel  up  my  arm.  the  bullet  struck  him  just  inside  the  right  hipbone.  a  claret  stain
appeared on his shorts and shirt. i paused to notice him. he sat wedged between the toilet bowl and wall,
one sandal missing, eyes totally white.

credit. but he was too far gone to have a viewpoint.

it was going well. i was pleased to see how well it was going. the trucks rumbled overhead. the
shower curtain smelled of mildewed vinyl. a richness, a smashing intensity. i approached the sitting figure,
careful not to step in blood, leave revealing prints. i took out my handkerchief, wiped the weapon clean,
placed it in  mink's hand, cautiously removing  the handkerchief, painstakingly wrapping his bony fingers,
one  by  one,  around  the  stock,  delicately  working  his  index  finger  through  the  trigger  guard.  he  was
foaming, a little, at the mouth. i stepped back to survey the remains of the shattering moment, the scene
of  squalid  violence  and  lonely  death  at  the  shadowy  fringes  of  society.  this  was  my  plan.  step  back,

i tried to see myself from mink's viewpoint. looming, dominant, gaining life-power, storing up life-

 135

mink's  eyes  dropped  out  of  his  skull.  they  gleamed,  briefly.  he  raised  his  hand  and  pulled  the

regard the squalor, make sure things were correctly placed.

trigger, shooting me in the wrist.

the world collapsed inward, all those vivid textures and connections buried in mounds of ordinary
stuff.  i  was  disappointed.  hurt,  stunned  and  disappointed.  what  had  happened  to  the  higher  plane  of
energy in which i'd carried out my scheme? the pain was searing. blood covered my forearm, wrist and
hand.  i  staggered  back,  moaning,  watching  blood  drip  from  the  tips  of  my  fingers.  i  was.  troubled  and
confused. colored dots appeared at the edge of my field of vision. familiar little dancing specks. the extra
dimensions, the super perceptions, were reduced to visual clutter, a whirling miscellany, meaningless.

"and this could represent the leading edge of some warmer air," mink said.

i looked at him. alive. his lap a puddle of blood. with the restoration of the normal order of matter
and sensation, i felt i was seeing him for the first time as a person. the old human muddles and quirks
were  set  flowing  again.  compassion,  remorse,  mercy.  but  before  i  could  help  mink,  i  had  to  do  some
basic repair work on myself. once again i took out my handkerchief, managed with my right hand and my
teeth to tie it firmly just above the bullethole in my left wrist, or between the wound and the heart. then i
sucked at the wound briefly, not knowing quite why, and spat out the resulting blood and pulp. the bullet
had made a shallow penetration and deflected away.  using my  good hand, i  grabbed mink by his bare
foot and dragged him across the blood-dappled tile, the gun still clutched in his fist. there was something
redemptive  here.  dragging  him  foot-first  across  the  tile,  across  the  medicated  carpet,  through  the  door
and  into  the  night.  something  large  and  grand  and  scenic.  is  it  better  to  commit  evil  and  attempt  to
balance it with an exalted act than to live a resolutely neutral life? i know i felt virtuous, i felt blood-stained
and stately, dragging the badly wounded man through the dark and empty street.

the rain had stopped. i was shocked at the amount of blood we were leaving behind. his, mainly.
the sidewalk was striped. an interesting cultural deposit. he reached up feebly, dropped more dylar down
his throat. the gun hand dragged.

we reached the car. mink kicked free, involuntarily, his body flopping and spinning, a little fishlike.
he made spent and gasping noises, short of oxygen. i decided to attempt mouth-to-mouth. i leaned over
him, used my thumb and index finger to clothes-pin his nose and then tried to work my face down into his.
the  awkwardness  and  grim  intimacy  of  the  act  made  it  seem  all  the  more  dignified  under  the
circumstances. all the larger, more generous. i kept trying to reach his mouth in order to breathe powerful
gusts of air into his lungs. my lips were gathered, ready to funnel. his eyes followed me down. perhaps he
thought he was about to be kissed. i savored the irony.

his mouth was awash in regurgitated dylar foam, half chewed tablets, flyspeck shards of polymer.
i felt large and selfless, above resentment. this was the key to selflessness, or so it seemed to me as i
knelt  over  the  wounded  man,  exhaling  rhythmically  in  the  littered  street  beneath  the  roadway.  get  past
disgust. forgive the foul body. embrace it whole. after some minutes of this, i felt him come around, take
regular breaths. i continued to hover just above him, our mouths almost touching.
"who shot me?" he said.

"you did."

"who shot you?"

"you did. the gun is in your hand."

"what was the point i was trying to make?"

"you were out of control. you weren't responsible. i forgive you."

"who are you, literally?"

"a passerby. a friend. it doesn't matter."

"some millipedes have eyes, some do not."


with  much  effort,  many  false  starts,  i  got  him  into  the  back  of  the  car,  where  he  stretched  out
moaning. it was no longer possible to tell whether the blood on my hands and clothes was his or mine. my
humanity soared. i started up the car. the pain in my arm was a throb, less fiery now. i drove one-handed
through the empty streets, looking for a hospital. iron city lying-in. mother of mercy. commiseration and
rapport.  i  would  take  whatever  they  had,  even  an  emergency  ward  in  the  worst  part  of  town.  this  is
where  we  belonged,  after  all,  with  the  multiple  slash  wounds,  the  entry  and  exit  wounds,  the  blunt
instrument  wounds,  the  traumas,  overdoses,  acute  deliriums.  the  only  traffic  was  a  milk  van,  a  bakery
van,  some  heavy  trucks.  the  sky  began  to  lighten.  we  came  to  a  place  with  a  neon  cross  over  the
entrance.  it  was  a  three-story  building  that  might  have  been  a  pentecostal  church,  a  day-care  center,
world headquarters for some movement of regimented youth.

there was a wheelchair ramp, which meant i could drag mink to the front door without banging his
head on the concrete steps. i got him out of the car, clutched his sleek foot and moved up the ramp. he



136

i  rang  the  bell.  in  a  matter  of  seconds,  someone  appeared  at  the  door.  an  old  woman,  a  nun,

"we're shot," i said, lifting my wrist in the air.
"we  see  a  lot  of  that  here,"  she  answered  matter-of-factly,  in  an  accented  voice,  turning  to  go

held one hand at his midsection  to stanch the flow. the gun hand dragged behind. dawn. there was a
spaciousness to  this moment, an epic pity and compassion. having shot him, having led him to believe
he'd shot himself, i felt i did honor to both of us, to all of us, by merging our fortunes, physically leading
him to safety. i took long slow strides, pulling his weight. it hadn't occurred to me that a man's attempts to
redeem himself might prolong the elation he felt when he committed the crime he now sought to make up
for.

black-habited, black-veiled, leaning on a cane.


back inside.

i dragged  mink across  the entranceway.  the place appeared  to be a clinic.  there  were waiting
rooms, screened cubicles, doors marked x-ray, eye test. we followed the old nun to the trauma room.
two orderlies showed up, great squat men with sumo physiques. they lifted mink onto a table and tore
away his clothes in neat short practiced strokes.
"inflated-adjusted real income," he said.


more  nuns  arrived,  rustling,  ancient,  speaking  german  to  each  other.  they  carried  transfusion
equipment, wheeled in trays of glinting implements. the original nun approached mink to remove the gun
from his hand. i watched her toss it in a desk drawer that held about ten other handguns and half a dozen
knives. there was a picture on the wall of jack kennedy holding hands with pope john xxiii in heaven.
heaven was a partly cloudy place.

and studied mink's body, which was now partly clad in sheets.
"no one knows why the sea birds come to san miguel," willie said.


i was growing fond of him. the original nun took me into a cubicle to work on my wound. i started
to give her a version of the shootings but she showed no interest. i told her it was an old gun with feeble
bullets.






kind of homogeneous presence that makes people smile at airports.

i asked my nun her name. sister hermann marie. i told her i knew some german, trying to gain
her favor, as i always did with medical personnel of any kind, at least in the early stages, before my fear
and distrust overwhelmed any hope i might have had in maneuvering for advantage.
"gut, besser, best," i said.


a smile appeared on her seamed face. i counted for her, pointed to objects and gave their names.
she nodded happily, cleaning out the wound and wrapping the wrist in sterile pads. she said i would not
need a splint and told me the doctor would write a prescription for antibiotics. we counted to ten together.

two more nuns appeared, wizened and creaky. my nun said something to them and soon all four
of us were charmingly engaged in a childlike dialogue. we did colors, items of clothing, parts of the body. i
felt  much  more  at  ease  in  this  german-speaking  company  than  i  had  with  the  hitler  scholars.  is  there
something so innocent in the recitation of names that cod is pleased?

sister hermann marie applied finishing touches to the bullet wound. from my chair i had a clear
view  of  the  picture  of  kennedy  and  the  pope  in  heaven.  i  had  a  sneaking  admiration  for  the  picture.  it
made  me  feel  good,  sentimentally  refreshed.  the  president  still  vigorous  after  death.  the  pope's
homeliness a kind of radiance. why shouldn't it be true? why shouldn't they meet somewhere, advanced
in time, against a layer of fluffy cumulus, to clasp hands? why shouldn't we all meet, as in some epic of
protean gods and ordinary people, aloft, well-formed, shining?

that, in the sky?"




souls of those who are saved?"

"such a violent country."
"have you been in germantown long?" i said.
"we are the last of the germans."
"who lives here now, mostly?"
"mostly no one," she said.
more nuns walked by, heavy rosaries swinging from  their belts.  i found  them a  merry sight,  the

she turned to glance at the picture.
"do you think we are stupid?" she said.
i was surprised by the force of her reply.
"then what is heaven, according to the church, if it isn't the abode of god and the angels and the

the doctor arrived, an elderly man in a shabby three-piece suit.  he spoke  german  to  the nuns

i said to my nun, "what does the church say about heaven today? is it still the old heaven, like

 137

"saved?  what  is  saved?  this  is  a  dumb  head,  who  would  come  in  here  to  talk  about  angels.

"but you're a nun. nuns believe these things. when we see a nun, it cheers us up, it's cute and

"you would have a head so dumb to believe this?"
"it's not what i believe that counts. it's what you believe."
"this  is  true,"  she  said.  "the  nonbelievers  need  the  believers.  they  are  desperate  to  have

she leaned toward me, her stark face framed in the black veil. i began to worry.
"we are here to take care of sick and injured. only this. you would talk about heaven, you must


show me an angel. please. i want to see."

amusing, being reminded that someone still believes in angels, in saints, all the traditional things."



someone believe. but show me a saint. give me one hair from the body of a saint."


find another place."

"other nuns wear dresses," i said reasonably. "here you still wear the old uniform. the habit, the
veil, the clunky shoes. you must believe in tradition. the old heaven and hell, the latin mass. the pope is
infallible, god created the world in six days. the great old beliefs. hell is burning lakes, winged demons."
"you would come in bleeding from the street and tell me six days it took to make a universe?"

"on the seventh he rested."

"you would talk of angels? here?"

"of course here. where else?"

i was frustrated and puzzled, close to shouting.

"why not armies that would fight in the sky at the end of the world?"

"why not? why are you a nun anyway? why do you have that picture on the wall?"

she drew back, her eyes filled with contemptuous pleasure.

"it is for others. not for us."

"but that's ridiculous. what others?"


"all the others. the others who spend their lives believing that we still believe. it is our task in the
world to believe things no one else takes seriously. to abandon such beliefs completely, the human race
would  die.  this  is  why  we  are  here.  a  tiny  minority.  to  embody  old  things,  old  beliefs.  the  devil,  the
angels, heaven, hell. if we did not pretend to believe these things, the world would collapse."







gullibilities. are you saying you don't take them seriously? your dedication is a pretense?"

"our  pretense  is  a  dedication.  someone  must  appear  to  believe.  our  lives  are  no  less  serious
than if we professed real faith, real belief. as belief shrinks from the world, people find it more necessary
than ever that someone believe. wild-eyed men in caves. nuns in black. monks who do not speak. we
are left to believe. fools, children. those who have abandoned belief  must still believe in us. they are
sure that they are right not to believe but they know belief must not fade completely. hell is when no one
believes.  there  must  always  be  believers.  fools,  idiots,  those  who  hear  voices,  those  who  speak  in
tongues. we are your lunatics. we surrender our lives to make your nonbelief possible. you are sure that
you are right but you don't want everyone to think as you do. there is no truth without fools. we are your
fools, your madwomen, rising at dawn to pray, lighting candles, asking statues for good health, long life."











without us."


"you've had long life. maybe it works."
she rattled out a laugh, showing teeth so old they were nearly transparent.
"soon no more. you will lose your believers."
"you've been praying for nothing all these years?"
"for the world, dumb head."
"and nothing survives? death is the end?"
"do you want to know what i believe or what i pretend to believe?"
"i don't want to hear this. this is terrible."
"but true."
"you're a nun. act like one."
"we take vows. poverty, chastity, obedience. serious vows. a serious life. you could not survive

"pretend?"
"of course pretend. do you think we are stupid? get out from here."
"you don't believe in heaven? a nun?"
"if you don't, why should i?"
"if you did, maybe i would."
"if i did, you would not have to."
"all  the  old  muddles  and  quirks,"  i  said.  "faith,  religion,  life  everlasting.  the  great  old  human

"there must be some of you who aren't pretending, who truly believe. i know there are. centuries



138

"you would come in from the street dragging a body by the foot and talk about angels who live in

of belief don't just peter out in a few years. there were whole fields of study devoted to these subjects.
angelology. a branch of theology just for angels. a science of angels. great minds debated these things.
there are great minds today. they still debate, they still believe."

the sky. get out from here."
she said something in german. i failed to understand. she spoke again, at some length, pressing

her  face  toward  mine,  the  words  growing  harsher,  wetter,  more  guttural.  her  eyes  showed  a  terrible
delight  in  my  incomprehension.  she  was  spraying  me  with  german.  a  storm  of  words.  she  grew  more
animated  as  the  speech  went  on.  a  gleeful  vehemence  entered  her  voice.  she  spoke  faster,  more
expressively. blood vessels flared in her eyes and face. i began to detect a cadence, a measured beat.
she was reciting something, i decided. litanies, hymns, catechisms. the mysteries of the rosary perhaps.
taunting me with scornful prayer.
the odd thing is i found it beautiful.


when her voice grew weak, i left  the cubicle and wandered around until  i found  the old doctor.
"herr doktor," i called, feeling like someone in a movie. he activated his hearing aid. i got my prescription,
asked  if  willie  mink  would  be  all  right.  he  wouldn't,  at  least  not  for  a  while.  but  he  wouldn't  die  either,
which gave him the edge on me.

the drive home was uneventful. i left the car in stover's driveway. the rear seat was covered with
blood.  there  was  blood  on  the  steering  wheel,  more  blood  on  the  dashboard  and  door  handles.  the
scientific study of the cultural behavior and development of man. anthropology.

i  went  upstairs  and  watched  the  kids  a  while.  all  asleep,  fumbling  through  their  dreams,  eyes
rapidly  moving  beneath  closed  lids.  i  got  into  bed  next  to  babette,  fully  dressed  except  for  my  shoes,
somehow knowing she wouldn't think it strange. but my mind kept racing, i couldn't sleep. after a while i
went down to the kitchen to sit with a cup of coffee, feel the pain in my wrist, the heightened pulse.

there was nothing to do but wait for the next sunset, when the sky would ring like bronze.


40

this was the day wilder got on his plastic tricycle, rode it around the block, turned right onto a dead end
street  and  pedaled  noisily  to  the  dead  end.  he  walked  the  tricycle  around  the  guard  rail  and  then  rode
along a paved walkway that went winding past some overgrown lots to a set of twenty concrete steps. the
plastic  wheels rumbled  and screeched. here our reconstruction yields to  the awe-struck account of  two
elderly  women  watching  from  the  second-story  back  porch  of  a  tall  house  in  the  trees.  he  walked  the
tricycle down the steps, guiding it with a duteous and unsentimental hand, letting it bump right along, as if
it were an odd-shaped little sibling, not necessarily cherished. he remounted, rode across the street, rode
across  the  sidewalk,  proceeded  onto  the  grassy  slope  that  bordered  the  expressway.  here  the  women
began  to  call.  hey,  hey,  they  said,  a  little  tentative  at  first,  not  ready  to  accept  the  implications  of  the
process unfolding before them. the boy pedaled diagonally down the slope, shrewdly reducing the angle
of descent, then paused on the bottom to aim his three-wheeler at the point on the opposite side which
seemed to represent the shortest distance across. hey, sonny, no. waving their arms, looking frantically
for  some  able-bodied  pedestrian  to  appear  on  the  scene.  wilder,  meanwhile,  ignoring  their  cries  or  not
hearing them in the serial whoosh of dashing hatchbacks and vans, began to pedal across the highway,
mystically charged. the women could only look, empty-mouthed, each with an arm in the air, a plea for
the scene to reverse, the boy to pedal backwards on his faded blue and yellow toy like a cartoon figure on
morning tv.  the drivers could not quite comprehend. in their knotted posture, belted in, they knew this
picture did not belong to the hurtling consciousness of the highway, the broad-ribboned modernist stream.
in speed  there was sense.  in signs, in patterns, in split-second lives. what did it  mean,  this little rotary
blur?  some  force  in  the  world  had  gone  awry.  they  veered,  d  would  not  even  look  at  them,  pedaled
straight for the median strip, a narrow patch of pale grass. he was pumped up, chesty, his arms appearing
to move as rapidly as his legs, the round head wagging in a jig of lame-brained determination. he had to
slow down to get onto the raised median, rearing up to let the front wheel edge over, extremely deliberate
in  his  movements,  following  some  numbered  scheme,  and  the  cars  went  wailing  past,  horns  blowing
belatedly,  drivers'  eyes  searching  the  rearview  mirror.  he  walked  the  tricycle  across  the  grass.  the
women  watched  him  regain  a  firm  placement  on  the  seat.  stay,  they  called.  do  not  go.  no,  no.  like
foreigners  reduced  to  simple  phrases.  the  cars  kept  coming,  whipping  into  the  straightaway,  endless
streaking traffic. he set off to cross the last three lanes, dropping off the median like a bouncing ball, front

 139

wheel,  rear  wheels.  then  the  head-wagging  race  to  the  other  side.  cars  dodged,  strayed,  climbed  the
curbstone, astonished heads appearing in the side windows. the  furiously pedaling boy could not know
how slow he seemed to be moving from the vantage point of the women on the porch. the women were
silent by now, outside the event, suddenly tired. how slow he moved, how mistaken he was in thinking he
was  breezing  right  along.  it  made  them  tired.  the  horns  kept  blowing,  sound  waves  mixing  in  the  air,
flattening, calling back from vanished cars, scolding. he reached the other side, briefly rode parallel to the
traffic, seemed to lose his balance, fall away, going down the embankment in a multicolored tumble. when
he  reappeared  a  second  later,  he  was  sitting  in  a  water  furrow,  part  of  the  intermittent  creek  that
accompanies the highway. stunned, he made the decision to cry. it took him a moment, mud and water
everywhere, the tricycle on its side. the women began to call once more, each raising an arm to revoke
the  action.  boy  in  the  water,  they  said.  look,  help,  drown.  and  he  seemed,  on  his  seat  in  the  creek,
profoundly howling, to have heard them for the first time, looking up over the earthen mound and into the
trees  across  the  expressway.  this  frightened  them  all  the  more.  they  called  and  waved,  were
approaching the early phases of uncontrollable terror when a passing motorist, as such people are called,
alertly pulled over, got out of  the car, skidded down  the embankment and lifted  the boy from the murky
shallows, holding him aloft for the clamoring elders to see.

we go to the overpass all the time. babette, wilder and i. we take a thermos of iced tea, park the
car, watch the setting sun. clouds are no deterrent. clouds intensify the drama, trap and shape the light.
heavy overcasts have little effect. light bursts through, tracers and smoky arcs. overcasts enhance the
mood.  we  find  little  to  say  to  each  other.  more  cars  arrive,  parking  in  a  line  that  extends  down  to  the
residential  zone.  people  walk  up  the  incline  and  onto  the  overpass,  carrying  fruit  and  nuts,  cool  drinks,
mainly the middle-aged, the elderly, some with webbed beach chairs which they set out on the sidewalk,
but  younger  couples  also,  arm  in  arm  at  the  rail,  looking  west.  the  sky  takes  on  content,  feeling,  an
exalted narrative life. the bands of color reach so high, seem at times to separate into their constituent
parts. there are turreted skies, light storms, softly falling streamers. it is hard to know how we should feel
about this. some people are scared by the sunsets, some determined to be elated, but most of us don't
know  how  to  feel,  are  ready  to  go  either  way.  rain  is  no  deterrent.  rain  brings  on  graded  displays,
wonderful running hues. more cars arrive, people come trudging up the incline. the spirit of these warm
evenings is hard to describe. there is anticipation in the air but it is not the expectant midsummer hum of
a shirt sleeve crowd, a sandlot game, with coherent precedents, a history of secure response. this waiting
is introverted, uneven, almost backward and shy, tending toward silence. what else do we feel? certainly
there is awe, it is all awe,  it transcends previous categories of awe, but we don't know whether we are
watching  in  wonder  or  dread,  we  don't  know  what  we  are  watching  or  what  it  means,  we  don't  know
whether it is permanent, a level of experience to which we will gradually adjust, into which our uncertainty
will eventually be absorbed, or just some atmospheric weirdness, soon to pass. the collapsible chairs are
yanked open, the old people sit. what is there to say? the sunsets linger and so do we. the sky is under
a  spell,  powerful  and  storied.  now  and  then  a  car  actually  crosses  the  overpass,  moving  slowly,
deferentially.  people  keep  coming  up  the  incline,  some  in  wheelchairs,  twisted  by  disease,  those  who
attend  them bending low to push against  the  grade. i didn't know how  many  handicapped and helpless
people there were in town until the warm nights brought crowds to the overpass. cars speed beneath us,
coming from the west, from out of the towering light, and we watch them as if for a sign, as if they carry on
their painted surfaces some residue of the sunset, a barely detectable luster or film of telltale dust. no one
plays  a  radio  or  speaks  in  a  voice  that  is  much  above  a  whisper.  something  golden  falls,  a  softness
delivered  to  the air. there are people walking dogs,  there are kids on bikes,  a  man with a camera  and
long lens, waiting for his moment. it is not until some time after dark has fallen, the insects screaming in
the  heat,  that  we  slowly  begin  to  disperse,  shyly,  politely,  car  after  car,  restored  to  our  separate  and
defensible selves.

their infrared devices at the earth and sky.

dr. chakravarty wants to talk to me but i am making it a point to stay away. he is eager to see
how  my  death  is  progressing.  an  interesting  case  perhaps.  he  wants  to  insert  me  once  more  in  the
imaging  block,  where  charged  particles  collide,  high  winds  blow.  but  i  am  afraid  of  the  imaging  block.
afraid of its magnetic fields, its computerized nuclear pulse. afraid of what it knows about me.
i am taking no calls.


the supermarket shelves have been rearranged. it happened one day without warning. there is
agitation and panic in the aisles, dismay in the faces of older shoppers. they walk in a fragmented trance,
stop and go, clusters of well-dressed figures frozen in the aisles, trying to figure out the pattern, discern
the underlying logic, trying to remember where they'd seen the cream of wheat. they see no reason for

the men in mylex suits are still in the area, yellow-snouted, gathering  their terrible data, aiming



140

it, find no sense in it. the scouring pads are with the hand soap now, the condiments are scattered. the
older the  man or woman,  the  more carefully dressed  and groomed.  men  in sansabelt slacks and bright
knit  shirts.  women  with  a  powdered  and  fussy  look,  a  self-conscious  air,  prepared  for  some  anxious
event.  they  turn  into  the  wrong  aisle,  peer  along  the  shelves,  sometimes  stop  abruptly,  causing  other
carts  to  run  into  them.  only  the  generic  food  is  where  it  was,  white  packages  plainly  labeled.  the  men
consult  lists,  the  women  do  not.  there  is  a  sense  of  wandering  now,  an  aimless  and  haunted  mood,
sweet-tempered people taken to the edge. they scrutinize the small print on packages, wary of a second
level of betrayal. the men scan for stamped dates, the women for ingredients. many have trouble making
out  the  words.  smeared  print,  ghost  images.  in  the  altered  shelves,  the  ambient  roar,  in  the  plain  and
heartless fact of their decline, they try to work their way through confusion. but in the end it doesn't matter
what they see or think they see. the terminals are equipped with holographic scanners, which decode the
binary secret of every item, infallibly. this is the language of waves and radiation, or how the dead speak
to the living. and this is where we wait together, regardless of age, our carts stocked with brightly colored
goods. a slowly moving line, satisfying, giving us time to glance at the tabloids in the racks. everything we
need  that  is  not  food  or  love  is  here  in  the  tabloid  racks.  the  tales  of  the  supernatural  and  the
extraterrestrial.  the  miracle  vitamins,  the  cures  for  cancer,  the  remedies  for  obesity.  the  cults  of  the
famous and the dead.

 141


