


Romeo
The name Romeo, in popular culture, has become nearly
synonymous with "lover." Romeo, in Romeo and Juliet, does
indeed experience a love of such purity and passion that he kills
himself when he believes that the object of his love, Juliet, has
died. The power of Romeo's love, however, often obscures a clear
vision of Romeo's character, which is far more complex.

Even Romeo's relation to love is not so simple. At the
beginning of the play, Romeo pines for Rosaline, proclaiming her
the paragon of women and despairing at her indifference toward him.
Taken together, Romeo's Rosaline-induced histrionics seem rather
juvenile. Romeo is a great reader of love poetry, and the portrayal
of his love for Rosaline suggests he is trying to re-create the
feelings that he has read about. After first kissing Juliet, she
tells him "you kiss by th' book," meaning that he kisses according
to the rules, and implying that while proficient, his kissing lacks
originality (1.5.107). In reference to Rosaline,
it seems, Romeo loves by the book. Rosaline, of course, slips from
Romeo's mind at first sight of Juliet. But Juliet is no mere replacement.
The love she shares with Romeo is far deeper, more authentic and
unique than the cliched puppy love Romeo felt for Rosaline. Romeo's
love matures over the course of the play from the shallow desire
to be in love to a profound and intense passion. One must ascribe
Romeo's development at least in part to Juliet. Her level-headed
observations, such as the one about Romeo's kissing, seem just the
thing to snap Romeo from his superficial idea of love and to inspire
him to begin to speak some of the most beautiful and intense love
poetry ever written.
Yet Romeo's deep capacity for love is merely a part of
his larger capacity for intense feeling of all kinds. Put another
way, it is possible to describe Romeo as lacking the capacity for
moderation. Love compels him to sneak into the garden of his enemy's
daughter, risking death simply to catch a glimpse of her. Anger
compels him to kill his wife's cousin in a reckless duel to avenge
the death of his friend. Despair compels him to suicide upon hearing
of Juliet's death. Such extreme behavior dominates Romeo's character
throughout the play and contributes to the ultimate tragedy that
befalls the lovers. Had Romeo restrained himself from killing Tybalt,
or waited even one day before killing himself after hearing the
news of Juliet's death, matters might have ended happily. Of course,
though, had Romeo not had such depths of feeling, the love he shared
with Juliet would never have existed in the first place.
Among his friends, especially while bantering with Mercutio, Romeo
shows glimpses of his social persona. He is intelligent, quick-witted,
fond of verbal jousting (particularly about sex), loyal, and unafraid
of danger.
