


Juliet 
Having not quite reached her fourteenth birthday, Juliet
is of an age that stands on the border between immaturity and maturity.
At the play's beginning however she seems merely an obedient, sheltered, naive
child. Though many girls her age--including her mother--get married, Juliet
has not given the subject any thought. When Lady Capulet mentions
Paris's interest in marrying Juliet, Juliet dutifully responds that
she will try to see if she can love him, a response that seems childish
in its obedience and in its immature conception of love. Juliet
seems to have no friends her own age, and she is not comfortable
talking about sex (as seen in her discomfort when the Nurse goes
on and on about a sexual joke at Juliet's expense in Act 1, scene
3).
Juliet gives glimpses of her determination, strength,
and sober-mindedness, in her earliest scenes, and offers a preview
of the woman she will become during the four-day span of Romeo
and Juliet. While Lady Capulet proves unable to quiet the
Nurse, Juliet succeeds with one word (also in Act 1, scene 3).
In addition, even in Juliet's dutiful acquiescence to try to love
Paris, there is some seed of steely determination. Juliet promises
to consider Paris as a possible husband to the precise degree her
mother desires. While an outward show of obedience, such a statement
can also be read as a refusal through passivity. Juliet will accede
to her mother's wishes, but she will not go out of her way to fall
in love with Paris.

Juliet's first meeting with Romeo propels her full-force
toward adulthood. Though profoundly in love with him, Juliet is
able to see and criticize Romeo's rash decisions and his tendency
to romanticize things. After Romeo kills Tybalt and is banished,
Juliet does not follow him blindly. She makes a logical and heartfelt
decision that her loyalty and love for Romeo must be her guiding
priorities. Essentially, Juliet cuts herself loose from her prior
social moorings--her nurse, her parents, and her social position
in Verona--in order to try to reunite with Romeo. When she wakes
in the tomb to find Romeo dead, she does not kill herself out of
feminine weakness, but rather out of an intensity of love, just
as Romeo did. Juliet's suicide actually requires more nerve than
Romeo's: while he swallows poison, she stabs herself through the
heart with a dagger.
Juliet's development from a wide-eyed girl into a self-assured, loyal,
and capable woman is one of Shakespeare's early triumphs of characterization.
It also marks one of his most confident and rounded treatments of
a female character.
