


Macbeth
Because we first hear of Macbeth in the wounded captain's
account of his battlefield valor, our initial impression is of a
brave and capable warrior. This perspective is complicated, however,
once we see Macbeth interact with the three witches. We realize
that his physical courage is joined by a consuming ambition and
a tendency to self-doubt--the prediction that he will be king brings
him joy, but it also creates inner turmoil. These three attributes--bravery,
ambition, and self-doubt--struggle for mastery of Macbeth throughout
the play. Shakespeare uses Macbeth to show the terrible effects
that ambition and guilt can have on a man who lacks strength of
character. We may classify Macbeth as irrevocably evil,
but his weak character separates him from Shakespeare's great villains--Iago
in Othello, Richard III in Richard III, Edmund
in King Lear--who are all strong enough to conquer
guilt and self-doubt. Macbeth, great warrior though he is, is ill
equipped for the psychic consequences of crime.

Before he kills Duncan, Macbeth is plagued by worry and
almost aborts the crime. It takes Lady Macbeth's steely sense of
purpose to push him into the deed. After the murder, however, her
powerful personality begins to disintegrate, leaving Macbeth increasingly alone.
He fluctuates between fits of fevered action, in which he plots a
series of murders to secure his throne, and moments of terrible guilt
(as when Banquo's ghost appears) and absolute pessimism (after his
wife's death, when he seems to succumb to despair). These fluctuations
reflect the tragic tension within Macbeth: he is at once too ambitious
to allow his conscience to stop him from murdering his way to the
top and too conscientious to be happy with himself as a murderer.
As things fall apart for him at the end of the play, he seems almost
relieved--with the English army at his gates, he can finally return
to life as a warrior, and he displays a kind of reckless bravado
as his enemies surround him and drag him down. In part, this stems
from his fatal confidence in the witches' prophecies, but it also
seems to derive from the fact that he has returned to the arena where
he has been most successful and where his internal turmoil need
not affect him--namely, the battlefield. Unlike many of Shakespeare's
other tragic heroes, Macbeth never seems to contemplate suicide:
"Why should I play the Roman fool," he asks, "and die / On mine
own sword?" (5.10.1-2).
Instead, he goes down fighting, bringing the play full circle: it
begins with Macbeth winning on the battlefield and ends with him
dying in combat.
