1
 rita hayworth and the shawshank redemption
there's a guy like me in every state and federal prison in america, i guess--i'm
the guy who can get it for you. tailor made cigarettes, a bag of reefer if you're
partial to that, a bottle of brandy to celebrate your son or daughter's high
school graduation, or anything else within reason, that is. it wasn't always that way.
i came to shawshank when i was just twenty, and i am one of the few people in
our happy little family willing to own up to what he did. i committed murder. i
put a large insurance policy on my wife -- who was three years older than i was --
and then i fixed the brakes on the chevrolet coupe her father had given us as a
wedding present. it worked out exactly as i had planned -- except i hadn't planned
on her stopping to pick up the neighbor woman and the neighbor woman’s infant son
on their way down castle hill and into town. the brakes let go and the car
crashed through the bushes at the edge of the town common, gathering speed.
bystanders said it must have been doing fifty or better when it hit the base of
the civil war statue and burst into flames.
i also hadn't planned on getting caught, but caught i was. i got a season's pass
into this place. maine has no death-penalty, but the district attorney saw to it
that i was tried for all three deaths and given three life sentences, to run one
after the other. that fixed up any chance of parole i might have for a long,
long time. the judge called what i had done "a hideous, heinous crime," and it
was; but it is also in the past now. you can look it up in the yellowing files
of the castle rock call, where the big headlines announcing my conviction look
sort of funny and antique next to the news of hitler and mussolini and fdr's
alphabet soup agencies.
have i rehabilitated myself, you ask? i don't even know what that word means, at
least as far as prisons and corrections go. i think it's a politician's word. it
may have some other meaning, and it may be that i will have a chance to find
out, but that is the future - something cons teach themselves not to think
about. i was young, good-looking, and from the poor side of town. i knocked up a
pretty, sulky, headstrong girl who lived in one of the fine old houses on
carbine street. her father was agreeable to the marriage if i would take a job
in the optical company he owned and "work my way up." i found out that what he
really had in mind was keeping me in his house and under his thumb, like a
disagreeable pet that has not quite been housebroken and which may bite. enough
hate eventually piled up to cause me to do what i did. given a second chance, i
would not do it again, but i'm not sure that means i am rehabilitated.
anyway, it's not me i want to tell you about; i want to tell you about a guy
named andy dufresne. but before i can tell you about andy, i have to explain a
few other things about myself. it won't take long.
as i said, i've been the guy who can get it for you here at shawshank for damn
near forty years. and that doesn't just mean contraband items like extra 
2
cigarettes or booze, although those items always top the list. but i've gotten
thousands of other items for men doing time here, some of them perfectly legal
yet hard to come by in a place where you've supposedly been brought to be
punished. there was one fellow who was in for raping a little girl and exposing
himself to dozens of others; i got him three pieces of pink vermont marble and
he did three lovely sculptures out of them - a baby, a boy of about twelve, and a
bearded young man. he called them the three ages of jesus, and those pieces of
sculpture are now in the parlor of a man who used to be governor of this state.
or here's a name you may remember if you grew up north of massachusetts-robert
alan cote. in 1951 he tried to rob the first mercantile bank of mechanic falls,
and the holdup turned into a bloodbath - six dead in the end, two of them members
of the gang, three of them hostages, one of them a young state cop who put his
head up at the wrong time and got a bullet in the eye. cote had a penny
collection. naturally they weren't going to let him have it in here, but with a
little help from his mother and a middleman who used to drive a laundry truck, i
was able to get it for him. i told him, bobby, you must be crazy, wanting to
have a coin collection in a stone hotel full of thieves. he looked at me and
smiled and said, i know where to keep them. they'll be safe enough. don't you
worry. and he was right. bobby cote died of a brain tumor in 1967, but that coin
collection has never turned up.
i've gotten men chocolates on valentine's day; i got three of those green
milkshakes they serve at mcdonald's around st. paddy's day for a crazy irishman
named o'malley; i even arranged for a midnight showing of deep throat and the
devil in miss jones for a party of twenty men who had pooled their resources to
rent the films . . . although i ended up doing a week in solitary for that
little escapade. it's the risk you run when you're the guy who can get it.
i've gotten reference books and fuck-books, joke novelties like hand-buzzers and
itching powder, and on more than one occasion i've seen that a long-timer has
gotten a pair of panties from his wife or his girlfriend . . . and i guess
you'll know what guys in here do with such items during the long nights when
time draws out like a blade. i don't get all those things gratis, and for some
items the price comes high. but i don't do it just for the money; what good is
money to me? i'm never going to own a cadillac car or fly off to jamaica for two
weeks in february. i do it for the same reason that a good butcher will only
sell you fresh meat: i got a reputation and i want to keep it. the only two
things i refuse to handle are guns and heavy drugs. i won't help anyone kill
himself or anyone else. i have enough killing on my mind to last me a lifetime.
yeah, i'm a regular neiman-marcus. and so when andy dufresne came to me in 1949
and asked if i could smuggle rita hayworth into the prison for him, i said it
would be no problem at all. and it wasn't. 
3
 ii
when andy came to shawshank in 1948, he was thirty years old. he was a short,
neat little man with sandy hair and small, clever hands. he wore gold-rimmed
spectacles. his fingernails were always clipped, and they were always clean.
that's a funny thing to remember about a man, i suppose, but it seems to sum
andy up for me. he always looked as if he should have been wearing a tie. on the
outside he had been a vice-president in the trust department of a large portland
bank. good work for a man as young as he was, especially when you consider how
conservative most banks are . . . and you have to multiply that conservatism by
ten when you get up into new england, where folks don't like to trust a man with
their money unless he's bald, limping, and constantly plucking at his pants to
get his truss around straight. andy was in for murdering his wife and her lover.
as i believe i have said, everyone in prison is an innocent man. oh, they read
that scripture the way those holy rollers on tv read the book of revelation.
they were the victims of judges with hearts of stone and balls to match, or
incompetent lawyers, or police frame-ups, or bad luck. they read the scripture,
but you can see a different scripture in their faces. most cons are a low sort,
no good to themselves or anyone else, and their worst luck was that their
mothers carried them to term.
in all my years at shawshank, there have been less than ten men whom i believed
when they told me they were innocent. andy dufresne was one of them, although i
only became convinced of his innocence over a period of years. if i had been on
the jury that heard his case in portland superior court over six stormy weeks in
1947-48, i would have voted to convict, too.
it was one hell of a case, all right; one of those juicy ones with all the right
elements. there was a beautiful girl with society connections (dead), a local
sports figure (also dead), and a prominent young businessman in the dock. there
was this, plus all the scandal the newspapers could hint at. the prosecution had
an open-and-shut case. the trial only lasted as long as it did because the da
was planning to run for the u.s. house of representatives and he wanted john q.
public to get a good long look at his resume. it was a crackerjack legal circus,
with spectators getting in line at four in the morning, despite the subzero
temperatures, to assure themselves of a seat.
the facts of the prosecution's case that andy never contested were these: that
he had a wife, linda collins dufresne; that in june of 1947 she had expressed an
interest in learning the game of golf at the falmouth hills country club; that
she did indeed take lessons for four months; that her instructor was the
falmouth hills golf pro, glenn quentin; that in late august of 1947 andy learned
that quentin and his wife had become lovers; that andy and linda dufresne argued
bitterly on the afternoon of september 10th, 1947. that the subject of their 
4
argument was her infidelity.
he testified that linda professed to be glad he knew; the sneaking around, she
said, was distressing. she told andy that she planned to obtain a reno divorce.
andy told her he would see her in hell before he would see her in reno. she went
off to spend the night with quentin in quentin's rented bungalow not far from
the golf course. the next morning his cleaning woman found both of them dead in
bed. each had been shot four times.
it was that last fact that militated more against andy than any of the others.
the da with the political aspirations made a great deal of it in his opening
statement and his closing summation. andrew dufresne, he said, was not a wronged
husband seeking a hot-blooded revenge against his cheating wife; that, the da
said, could be understood, if not condoned. but this revenge had been of a much
colder type. consider! the da thundered at the jury. four and four! not six
shots, but eight! he had fired the gun empty . . . and then stopped to reload so
he could shoot each of them again! four for him and four for her, the
portland sun blared. the boston register dubbed him the “even-steven killer.”
a clerk from the wise pawnshop in lewiston testified that he had sold a six-shot
.38 police special to andrew dufresne just two days before the double murder. a
bartender from the country club bar testified that andy had come in around seven
o'clock on the evening of september 10th, had tossed off three straight whiskeys
in a twenty-minute period-when he got up from the bar-stool he told the
bartender that he was going up to glenn quentin's house and he, the bartender,
could "read about the rest of it in the papers." another clerk, this one from
the handy-pik store a mile or so from quentin's house, told the court that
dufresne had come in around quarter to nine on that same night. he purchased
cigarettes, three quarts of beer, and some dishtowels. the county medical
examiner testified that quentin and the dufresne woman had been killed between
11:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on the night of september 10th- 11th. the detective
from the attorney general's office who had been in charge of the case testified
that there was a turnout less than seventy yards from the bungalow, and that on
the afternoon of september 11th, three pieces of evidence had been removed from
that turnout: first item, two empty quart bottles of narragansett beer (with the
defendant's fingerprints on them); second item, twelve cigarette ends (all
kools, the defendant's brand); third item, a plaster cast of a set of tire
tracks (exactly matching the tread-and-wear pattern of the tires on the
defendant's 1947 plymouth).
in the living room of quentin's bungalow, four dishtowels had been found lying
on the sofa. there were bullet-holes through them and powder-burns on them. the
detective theorized (over the agonized objections of andy's lawyer) that the
murderer had wrapped the towels around the muzzle of the murder-weapon to muffle
the sound of the gunshots. 
5
andy dufresne took the stand in his own defense and told his story calmly,
coolly, and dispassionately. he said he had begun to hear distressing rumors
about his wife and glenn quentin as early as the last week in july. in late
august he had become distressed enough to investigate a bit. on an evening when
linda was supposed to have gone shopping in portland after her golf lesson, andy
had followed her and quentin to quentin's two-story rented house (inevitably
dubbed "the love-nest" by the papers). he had parked in the turnout until
quentin drove her back to the country club where her car was parked, about three
hours later.
"do you mean to tell this court that you followed your wife in your brand-new
plymouth sedan?" the da asked him on cross examination.
"i swapped cars for the evening with a friend," andy said, and this cool
admission of how well-planned his investigation had been did him no good at all
in the eyes of the jury.
after returning the friend's car and picking up his own, he had gone home. linda
had been in bed, reading a book. he asked her how her trip to portland had been.
she replied that it had been fun, but she hadn't seen anything she liked well
enough to buy. "that's when i knew for sure," andy told the breathless
spectators. he spoke in the same calm, remote voice in which he delivered almost
all of his testimony.
"what was your frame of mind in the seventeen days between then and the night
your wife was murdered?" andy's lawyer asked him.
"i was in great distress," andy said calmly, coldly. like a man reciting a
shopping list he said that he had considered suicide, and had even gone so far
as to purchase a gun in lewiston on september 8th.
his lawyer then invited him to tell the jury what had happened after his wife
left to meet glenn quentin on the night of the murders. andy told them . . . and
the impression he made was the worst possible.
i knew him for close to thirty years, and i can tell you he was the most
self-possessed man i've ever known. what was right with him he'd only give you a
little at a time. what was wrong with him he kept bottled up inside. if he ever
had a dark night of the soul, as some writer or other has called it, you would
never know. he was the type of man who, if he had decided to commit suicide,
would do it without leaving a note but not until his affairs had been put neatly
in order. if he had cried on the witness stand, or if his voice had thickened
and grown hesitant, even if he had started yelling at that washington-bound
district attorney, i don't believe he would have gotten the life sentence he 
6
wound up with. even if he had've, he would have been out on parole by 1954. but
he told his story like a recording machine, seeming to say to the jury: this is
it. take it or leave it. they left it.
he said he was drunk that night, that he'd been more or less drunk since august
24th, and that he was a man who didn't handle his liquor very well. of course
that by itself would have been hard for any jury to swallow. they just couldn't
see this coldly self-possessed young man in the neat double-breasted three-piece
woolen suit ever getting falling-down drunk over his wife's sleazy little affair
with some small-town golf pro. i believed it because i had a chance to watch
andy that those six men and six women didn't have.
andy dufresne took just four drinks a year all the time i knew him. he would
meet me in the exercise yard every year about a week before his birthday and
then again about two weeks before christmas. on each occasion he would arrange
for a bottle of jack daniel's. he bought it the way most cons arrange to buy
their stuff-the slave's wages they pay in here, plus a little of his own. up
until 1965 what you got for your time was a dime an hour. in '65 they raised it
all the way up to a quarter. my commission on liquor was and is ten per cent,
and when you add on that surcharge to the price of a fine sippin' whiskey like
the black jack, you get an idea of how many hours of andy dufresne's sweat in
the prison laundry was going to buy his four drinks a year.
on the morning of his birthday, september 20th, he would have himself a big
knock, and then he'd have another that night after lights-out. the following day
he'd give the rest of the bottle back to me, and i would share it around. as for
the other bottle, he dealt himself one drink christmas night and another on new
year's eve. then that bottle would also come to me with instructions to pass it
on. four drinks a year-and that is the behavior of a man who has been bitten
hard by the bottle. hard enough to draw blood.
he told the jury that on the night of the tenth he had been so drunk he could
only remember what had happened in little isolated snatches. he had gotten drunk
that afternoon-"i took on a double helping of dutch courage" is how he put
it-before taking on linda.
after she left to meet quentin, he remembered deciding to confront them. on the
way to quentin's bungalow, he swung into the country club for a couple of quick
ones. he could not, he said, remember telling the bartender he could "read about
the rest of it in the papers," or saying anything to him at all. he remembered
buying beer in the handy-pik, but not the dishtowels. "why would i want
dishtowels?" he asked, and one of the papers reported that three of the lady
jurors shuddered.
later, much later, he speculated to me about the clerk who had testified on the 
7
subject of those dishtowels, and i think it's worth jotting down what he said.
"suppose that, during their canvass for witnesses," andy said one day in the
exercise yard, "they stumble on this fellow who sold me the beer that night. by
then three days have gone by. the facts of the case have been broadsided in all
the papers. maybe they ganged up on the guy, five or six cops, plus the dick
from the attorney general's office, plus the da's assistant. memory is a pretty
subjective thing, red. they could have started out with 'isn't it possible that
he purchased four or five dishtowels?' and worked their way up from there. if
enough people want you to remember something, that can be a pretty powerful
persuader."
i agreed that it could.
"but there's one even more powerful," andy went on in that musing way of his. "i
think it's at least possible that he convinced himself. it was the limelight.
reporters asking him questions, his picture in the papers . . . all topped, of
course, by his star turn in court. i'm not saying that he deliberately falsified
his story, or perjured himself. i think it's possible that he could have passed
a lie detector test with flying colors, or sworn on his mother's sacred name
that i bought those dishtowels. but still . . . memory is such a goddam
subjective thing.
"i know this much: even though my own lawyer thought i had to be lying about
half my story, he never bought that business about the dishtowels. it's crazy on
the face of it. i was pig-drunk, too drunk to have been thinking about muffling
the gunshots. if i'd done it, i just would have let them rip."
he went up to the turnout and parked there. he drank beer and smoked cigarettes.
he watched the lights downstairs in quentin's place go out. he watched a single
light go on upstairs . . . and fifteen minutes later he watched that one go out.
he said he could guess the rest.
"mr. dufresne, did you then go up to glenn quentin's house and kill the two of
them?" his lawyer thundered.
"no, i did not," andy answered. by midnight, he said, he was sobering up. he was
also feeling the first signs of a bad hangover. he decided to go home and sleep
it off and think about the whole thing in a more adult fashion the next day. "at
that time, as i drove home, i was beginning to think that the wisest course
would be to simply let her go to reno and get her divorce."
"thank you, mr. dufresne."
the da popped up. 
8
"you divorced her in the quickest way you could think of, didn't you? you
divorced her with a .38 revolver wrapped in dishtowels, didn't you?"
"no sir, i did not," andy said calmly.
"and then you shot her lover."
"no, sir."
"you mean you shot quentin first?"
"i mean i didn't shoot either one of them. i drank two quarts of beer and smoked
however many cigarettes the police found at the turnout. then i drove home and
went to bed."
"you told the jury that between august twenty-fourth and september tenth you
were feeling suicidal."
"yes, sir."
"suicidal enough to buy a revolver."
"yes."
"would it bother you overmuch, mr. dufresne, if i told you that you do not seem
to me to be the suicidal type?"
"no," andy said, "but you don't impress me as being terribly sensitive, and i
doubt very much that, if i were feeling suicidal, i would take my problem to
you."
there was a slight tense titter in the courtroom at this, but it won him no
points with the jury.
"did you take your thirty-eight with you on the night of september tenth?"
"no; as i've already testified-"
"oh, yes!" the da smiled sarcastically. "you threw it into the river, didn't
you? the royal river. on the afternoon of september ninth . "
"yes, sir."
"one day before the murders." 
9
"yes, sir."
"that's convenient, isn't it?"
"it's neither convenient nor inconvenient. only the truth."
"i believe you heard lieutenant mincher's testimony?" mincher had been in charge
of the party which had dragged the stretch of the royal near pond road bridge,
from which andy had testified he had thrown the gun. the police had not found
it.
"yes, sir. you know i heard it."
"then you heard him tell the court that they found no gun, although they dragged
for three days. that was rather convenient, too, wasn't it?"
"convenience aside, it's a fact that they didn't find the gun," andy responded
calmly. "but i should like to point out to both you and the jury that the pond
road bridge is very close to where the royal river empties into the bay of
yarmouth. the current is strong. the gun may have been carried out into the bay
itself."
"and so no comparison can be made between the riflings on the bullets taken from
the bloodstained corpses of your wife and mr. glenn quentin and the riflings on
the barrel of your gun. that's correct, isn't it, mr. dufresne?"
"yes. "
"that's also rather convenient, isn't it?"
at that, according to the papers, andy displayed one of the few slight emotional
reactions he allowed himself during the entire six-week period of the trial. a
slight, bitter smile crossed his face.
"since i am innocent of this crime, sir, and since i am telling the truth about
throwing my gun into the river the day before the crime took place, then it
seems to me decidedly inconvenient that the gun was never found."
the da hammered at him for two days. he re-read the handy-pik clerk's testimony
about the dishtowels to andy. andy repeated that he could not recall buying
them, but admitted that he also couldn't remember not buying them.
was it true that andy and linda dufresne had taken out a joint insurance policy
in early 1947 ? yes, that was true. and if acquitted, wasn't it true that andy
stood to gain fifty thousand dollars in benefits? true. and wasn't it true that 
10
he had gone up to glenn quentin's house with murder in his heart, and wasn't it
also true that he had indeed committed murder twice over? no, it was not true.
then what did he think had happened, since there had been no signs of robbery?
"i have no way of knowing that, sir," andy said quietly.
the case went to the jury at 1:00 p.m. on a snowy wednesday afternoon. the
twelve jurymen and -women came back in at 3:30. the bailiff said they would have
been back earlier, but they had held off in order to enjoy a nice chicken dinner
from bentley's restaurant at the county's expense. they found him guilty, and
brother, if maine had the death-penalty, he would have done the air dance before
that spring's crocuses poked their heads out of the snow.
the da had asked him what he thought had happened, and andy slipped the
question-but he did have an idea, and i got it out of him late one evening in
1955. it had taken those seven years for us to progress from nodding
acquaintances to fairly close friends- but i never felt really close to andy
until 1960 or so, and i believe i was the only one who ever did get really close
to him. both being long-timers, we were in the same cellblock from beginning to
end, although i was halfway down the corridor from him.
"what do i think?" he laughed-but there was no humor in the sound. "i think
there was a lot of bad luck floating around that night. more than could ever get
together in the same short span of time again. i think it must have been some
stranger, just passing through. maybe someone who had a flat tire on that road
after i went home. maybe a burglar. maybe a psychopath. he killed them, that's
all. and i'm here."

 iii 
11

as simple as that. and he was condemned to spend the rest of his life in
shawshank - or the part of it that mattered. five years later he began to have
parole hearings, and he was turned down just as regular as clockwork in spite of
being a model prisoner. getting a pass out of shawshank when you've got murder
stamped on your admittance-slip is slow work, as slow as a river eroding a rock.
seven men sit on the board, two more than at most state prisons, and every one
of those seven has an ass as hard as the water drawn up from a mineral-spring
well. you can't buy those guys, you can't sweet-talk them, you can't cry for
them. as far as the board in here is concerned, money don't talk, and nobody
walks. there were other reasons in andy's case as well . . . but that belongs a
little further along in my story.
there was a trusty, name of kendricks, who was into me for some pretty heavy
money back in the fifties, and it was four years before he got it all paid off.
most of the interest he paid me was information-in my line of work, you're dead
if you can't find ways of keeping your ear to the ground. this kendricks, for
instance, had access to records i was never going to see running a stamper down
in the goddam plate-shop.
kendricks told me that the parole board vote was 7-0 against andy dufresne
through 1957, 6-1 in '58, 7-0 again in '59, and 5-2 in '60. after that i don't
know, but i do know that sixteen years later he was still in cell 14 of
cellblock 5. by then – 1975 - he was fifty-seven. they probably would have gotten
big-hearted and let him out around 1983. they give you life, and that's what
they take-all of it that counts, anyway. maybe they set you loose someday, but .
. . ..
well, listen: i knew this guy, sherwood bolton, his name was, and he had
this pigeon in his cell. from 1945 until 1953, when they let him out, he had
that pigeon. he wasn't any birdman of alcatraz; he just had this pigeon. jake,
he called him. he set jake free a day before he, sherwood, that is, was to walk,
and jake flew away just as pretty as you could want. but about a week after
sherwood bolton left our happy little family, a friend of mine called me over to
the west corner of the exercise yard, where sherwood used to hang out. a bird
was lying there like a very small pile of dirty bed-linen. it looked starved. my
friend said: "isn't that jake, red?" it was. that pigeon was just as dead as a
turd.
i remember the first time andy dufresne got in touch with me for something; i
remember like it was yesterday. that wasn't the time he wanted rita hayworth,
though. that came later. in that summer of 1948 he came around for something
else.
most of my deals are done right there in the exercise yard, and that's where 
12
this one went down. our yard is big, much bigger than most it's a perfect
square, ninety yards on a side. the north side is the outer wall, with a
guard-tower at either end. the guards up there are armed with binoculars and
riot guns. the main gate is in that north side. the truck loading-bays are on
the south side of the yard. there are five of them. shawshank is a busy place
during the work week-deliveries in, deliveries out. we have the license-plate
factory, and a big industrial laundry that does all the prison wet-wash, plus that
of kittery receiving hospital and the eliot nursing home. there's also a big
automotive garage where mechanic inmates fix prison, state, and municipal
vehicles-not to mention the private cars of the screws, the administration officers . . .
and, on more than one occasion, those of the parole board.
the east side is a thick stone wall full of tiny slit windows. cellblock 5 is on
the other side of that wall. the west side is administration and the infirmary.
shawshank has never been as overcrowded as most prisons, and back in '48 it was
only filled to something like two-thirds capacity, but at any given time there
might be eighty to a hundred and twenty cons on the yard- playing toss with a
football or a baseball, shooting craps, jawing at each other, making deals. on
sunday the place was even more crowded; on sunday the place would have looked
like a country holiday . . . if there had been any women.
it was on a sunday that andy first came to me. i had just finished talking to
elmore armitage, a fellow who often came in handy to me, about a radio when andy
walked up. i knew who he was, of course; he had a reputation for being a snob
and a cold fish. people were saying he was marked for trouble already. one of
the people saying so was bogs diamond, a bad man to have on your case. andy had
no cellmate, and i'd heard that was just the way he wanted it, although people
were already saying he thought his shit smelled sweeter than the ordinary. but i
don't have to listen to rumors about a man when i can judge him for myself.
"hello," he said. "i'm andy dufresne." he offered his hand and i shook it. he
wasn't a man to waste time being social; he got right to the point. "i
understand that you're a man who knows how to get things . "
i agreed that i was able to locate certain items from time to time.
"how do you do that?" andy asked.
"sometimes," i said, "things just seem to come into my hand. i can't explain it.
unless it's because i'm irish."
he smiled a little at that. "i wonder if you could get me a rock hammer. "
"what would that be, and why would you want it?"
andy looked surprised. "do you make motivations a part of your business?" with 
13
words like those i could understand how he had gotten a reputation for being the
snobby sort, the kind of guy who likes to put on airs-but i sensed a tiny thread
of humor in his question.
"i'll tell you," i said. "if you wanted a toothbrush, i wouldn't ask questions.
i'd just quote you a price. because a toothbrush, you see, is a non-lethal sort
of an object."
"you have strong feelings about lethal objects?"
"i do."
an old friction-taped baseball flew toward us and he turned, cat-quick, and
picked it out of the air. it was a move frank malzone would have been proud of.
andy flicked the ball back to where it had come from-just a quick and
easy-looking flick of the wrist, but that throw had some mustard on it, just the
same. i could see a lot of people were watching us with one eye as they went
about their business. probably the guards in the tower were watching, too. i
won't gild the lily; there are cons that swing weight in any prison, maybe four
or five in a small one, maybe two or three dozen in a big one. at shawshank i
was one of those with some weight, and what i thought of andy dufresne would
have a lot to do with how his time went. he probably knew it, too, but he wasn't
kowtowing or sucking up to me, and i respected him for that.
"fair enough. i'll tell you what it is and why i want it. a rock hammer looks
like a miniature pickaxe-about so long." he held his hands about a foot apart,
and that was when i first noticed how neatly kept his nails were. "it's got a
small sharp pick on one end and a flat, blunt hammerhead on the other. i want it
because i like rocks."
"rocks, " i said.
"squat down here a minute," he said.
i humored him. we hunkered down on our haunches like indians.
andy took a handful of exercise yard dirt and began to sift it between his neat
hands, so it emerged in a fine cloud. small pebbles were left over, one or two
sparkly, the rest dull and plain. one of the dull ones was quartz, but it was
only dull until you'd rubbed it clean. then it had a nice milky glow. andy did
the cleaning and then tossed it to me. i caught it and named it.
"quartz, sure," he said. "and look. mica. shale. silted granite. here's a place
of graded limestone, from when they cut this place out of the side of the hill."
he tossed them away and dusted his hands. "i'm a rockhound. at least . . . i was 
14
a rockhound. in my old life. i'd like to be one again, on a limited scale."
"sunday expeditions in the exercise yard?" i asked, standing up. it was a silly
idea, and yet . . . seeing that little piece of quartz had given my heart a
funny tweak. i don't know exactly why; just an association with the outside
world, i suppose. you didn't think of such things in terms of the yard. quartz
was something you picked out of a small, quick-running stream.
"better to have sunday expeditions here than no sunday expeditions at all," he
said.
"you could plant an item like that rock-hammer in somebody's skull," i remarked.
"i have no enemies here," he said quietly.
"no?" i smiled. "wait awhile."
"if there's trouble, i can handle it without using a rock hammer. "
"maybe you want to try an escape? going under the wall? because if you do-"
he laughed politely. when i saw the rock-hammer three weeks later, i understood
why.
"you know," i said, "if anyone sees you with it, they'll take it away. if they
saw you with a spoon, they'd take it away. what are you going to do, just sit
down here in the yard and start bangin' away?"
"oh, i believe i can do a lot better than that."
i nodded. that part of it really wasn't my business, anyway. a man engages my
services to get him something. whether he can keep it or not after i get it is
his business.
"how much would an item like that go for?" i asked. i was beginning to enjoy his
quiet, low-key style. when you've spent ten years in stir, as i had then, you
can get awfully tired of the bellowers and the braggarts and the loud-mouths.
yes, i think it would be fair to say i liked andy from the first.
"eight dollars in any rock-and-gem shop," he said, "but i realize that in a
business like yours you work on a cost-plus basis-"
"cost plus ten per cent is my going rate, but i have to go up some on a dangerous
item. for something like the gadget you're talking about, it takes a little more
goose-grease to get the wheel turning. let's say ten dollars.' 
15
"ten it is."
i looked at him, smiling a little. "have you got ten dollars?"
"i do," he said quietly.
a long time after, i discovered that he had better than five hundred. he had
brought it in with him. when they check you at this hotel, one of the bellhops
is obliged to bend you over ant take a look up your works-but there are a lot of
works, and, not to put too fine a point on it, a man who is really determined
can get; fairly large item quite a ways up them-far enough to be out o sight,
unless the bellhop you happen to draw is in the mood to pull on a rubber glove
and go prospecting.
"that's fine, " i said. "you ought to know what i expect if you get caught with
what i get you."
"i suppose i should," he said, and i could tell by the slight change in his gray
eyes that he knew exactly what i was going to say. it was a slight lightening, a
gleam of his special ironic humor
"if you get caught, you'll say you found it. that's about the long and short of
it. they'll put you in solitary for three or you weeks . . . plus, of course,
you'll lose your toy and you'll get black mark on your record. if you give them
my name, you and will never do business again. not for so much as a pair of
shoelace or a bag of bugler. and i'll send some fellows around to lump you up. i
don't like violence, but you'll understand my position. i can' allow it to get
around that i can't handle myself. that would sure finish me."
"yes. i suppose it would. i understand, and you don't need to worry. "
"i never worry," i said. "in a place like this there's no percentage in it."
he nodded and walked away. three days later he walked u] beside me in the
exercise yard during the laundry's morning break he didn't speak or even look my
way, but pressed a picture of the honorable alexander hamilton into my hand
as neatly as a good magician does a card-trick. he was a man who adapted fast.
i got him his rock-hammer. i had it in my cell for one night, and it was just as he described
it. it was no tool for escape (it would have taken a man just about six hundred years to
tunnel under the wall using that rock-hammer, i figured), but i still felt some misgivings. if
you planted that pickaxe end in a man's head, he would surely never
listen to fibber mcgee and molly on the radio again. and andy had already begun having
trouble with the sisters. i hoped it wasn't them he was wanting the rockhammer
for. 
16
in the end, i trusted my judgment. early the next morning, twenty minutes before
the wake-up horn went off, i slipped the rock-hammer and a package of camels to
ernie, the old trusty who swept the cellblock 5 corridors until he was let free
in 1956. he slipped it into his tunic without a word, and i didn't see the
rock hammer again for nineteen years, and by then it was damned near worn away to
nothing.
the following sunday andy walked over to me in the exercise yard again. he was
nothing to look at that day, i can tell you. his lower lip was swelled up so big
it looked like a summer sausage, his right eye was swollen half-shut, and there
was an ugly washboard scrape across one cheek. he was having his troubles with
the sisters, all right, but he never mentioned them. "thanks for the tool," he
said, and walked away.
i watched him curiously. he walked a few steps, saw something in the dirt, bent
over, and picked it up. it was a small rock. prison fatigues, except for those
worn by mechanics when they're on the job, have no pockets. but there are ways
to get around that. the little pebble disappeared up andy's sleeve and didn't
come down. i admired that . . . and i admired him. in spite of the problems he
was having, he was going on with his life. there are thousands who don't or
won't or can't, and plenty of them aren't in prison, either. and i noticed that,
although his face looked as if a twister had happened to it, his hands were
still neat and clean, the nails well-kept.

i didn't see much of him over the next six months; andy spent a lot of that time
in solitary.
 iv 
17
a few words about the sisters.
in a lot of pens they are known as bull queers or jailhouse susies-just lately
the term in fashion is "killer queens." but in shawshank they were always the
sisters. i don't know why, but other than the name i guess there was no
difference.
it comes as no surprise to most these days that there's a lot of buggery going
on inside the walls-except to some of the new fish, maybe, who have the
misfortune to be young, slim, good-looking, and unwary-but homosexuality, like
straight sex, comes in a hundred different shapes and forms. there are men who
can't stand to be without sex of some kind and turn to another man to keep from
going crazy. usually what follows is an arrangement between two fundamentally
heterosexual men, although i've sometimes wondered if they are quite as
heterosexual as they thought they were going to be when they get back to their
wives or their girlfriends.
there are also men who get "turned" in prison. in the current parlance they "go
gay," or "come out of the closet. " mostly (but not always) they play the
female, and their favors are competed for fiercely.
and then there are the sisters.
they are to prison society what the rapist is to the society outside the walls.
they're usually long-timers, doing hard bullets for brutal crimes. their prey is
the young, the weak, and the inexperienced . . . or, as in the case of andy
dufresne, the weak-looking. their hunting grounds are the showers, the cramped,
tunnel-like areaway behind the industrial washers in the laundry, sometimes the
infirmary. on more than one occasion rape has occurred in the closet-sized
projection booth behind the auditorium. most often what the sisters take by
force they could have had for free, if they wanted it that way; those who have
been turned always seem to have "crushes" on one sister or another, like teenage
girls with their sinatras, presleys, or redfords. but for the sisters, the joy
has always been in taking it by force . . . and i guess it always will be.
because of his small size and fair good looks (and maybe also because of that
very quality of self-possession i had admired), the sisters were after andy from
the day he walked in. if this was some kind of fairy story, i'd tell you that
andy fought the good fight until they left him alone. i wish i could say that,
but i can't. prison is no fairy-tale world.
the first time for him was in the shower less than three days after he joined
our happy shawshank family. just a lot of slap and tickle that time, i
understand. they like to size you up before they make their real move, like 
18
jackals finding out if the prey is as weak and hamstrung as it looks.
andy punched back and bloodied the lip of a big, hulking sister named bogs
diamond-gone these many years since to who knows where. a guard broke it up
before it could go any further, but bogs promised to get him-and bogs did.
the second time was behind the washers in the laundry. a lot has gone on in that
long, dusty, and narrow space over the years; the guards know about it and just
let it be. it's dim and littered with bags of washing and bleaching compound,
drums of hexlite catalyst, as harmless as salt if your hands are dry, murderous
as battery acid if they're wet. the guards don't like to go back there. there's
no room to maneuver, and one of the first things they teach them when they come
to work in a place like this is to never let the cons get you in a place where
you can't back up.
bogs wasn't there that day, but henley backus, who had been washroom foreman
down there since 1922, told me that four of his friends were. andy held them at
bay for awhile with a scoop of burning hexlite, threatening to throw it in their eyes if
they came any closer, but he tripped trying to back around one of the big washex
fourpockets. that was all it took. they were on him.
i guess the phrase gang-rape is one that doesn't change much from one generation
to the next. that's what they did to him, those four sisters. they bent him over
a gear-box and one of them held a phillips screwdriver to his temple while they
gave him the business. it rips you up some, but not bad-am i speaking from
personal experience, you ask?-i only wish i weren't. you bleed for awhile. if
you don't want some clown asking you if you just started your period, you wad up
a bunch of toilet paper and keep it down the back of your underwear until it
stops. the bleeding really is like a menstrual flow; it keeps up for two, maybe
three days, a slow trickle. then it stops. no harm done, unless they've done
something even more unnatural to you. no physical harm done but rape is rape,
and eventually you have to look at your face in the mirror again and decide what
to make of yourself.
andy went through that alone, the way he went through everything alone in those
days. he must have come to the conclusion that others before him had come to,
namely, that then are only two ways to deal with the sisters: fight them and get
taken or just get taken.
he decided to fight. when bogs and two of his buddies cam after him a week or so
after the laundry incident ("i heard ya go broke in," bogs said, according to
ernie, who was around at the time), andy slugged it out with them. he broke the
nose of fellow named rooster macbride, a heavy-gutted farmer who was is for
beating his stepdaughter to death. rooster died in here, i'm happy to add.
they took him, all three of them. when it was done, rooster and the other egg-it 
19
might have been pete verness, but i'm no completely sure-forced andy down to his
knees. bogs diamond stepped in front of him. he had a pearl-handled razor in
those day with the words diamond pearl engraved on both sides of the grip he
opened it and said, "i'm gonna open my fly now, mister man and you're going to
swallow what i give you to swallow. and when you done swallowed mine, you're
gonna swallow rooster's. i guess you done broke his nose and i think he ought to
have something to pay for it."
andy said, "anything of yours that you stick in my mouth you're going to lose
it."
bogs looked at andy like he was crazy, ernie said.
"no," he told andy, talking to him slowly, like andy was stupid kid. "you didn't
understand what i said. you do anything like that and i'll put all eight inches
of this steel into your ear. get it?"
"i understood what you said. i don't think you understood me. i'm going to bite
whatever you stick into my mouth. you can put that razor into my brain, i guess,
but you should know that sudden serious brain injury causes the victim to
simultaneously urinate, defecate . . . and bite down."
he looked up at bogs, smiling that little smile of his, old ernie said, as if
the three of them had been discussing stocks and bonds with him instead of
throwing it to him just as hard as they could. just as if he was wearing one of
his three-piece bankers' suits instead of kneeling on a dirty broom-closet floor
with his pants around his ankles and blood trickling down the insides of his
thighs.
"in fact," he went on, "i understand that the bite-reflex is sometimes so strong
that the victim's jaws have to be pried open with a crowbar or a jackhandle."
bogs didn't put anything in andy's mouth that night in late february of 1948,
and neither did rooster macbride, and so far as i know, no one else ever did,
either. what the three of them did was to beat andy within an inch of his life,
and all four of them ended up doing a jolt in solitary. andy and rooster
macbride went by way of the infirmary.
how many times did that particular crew have at him? i don't know. i think
rooster lost his taste fairly early on -- being in nosesplints for a month can do
that to a fellow -- and bogs diamond left off that summer, all at once.
that was a strange thing. bogs was found in his cell, badly beaten, one morning
in early june, when he didn't show up in the breakfast nose-count. he wouldn't
say who had done it, or how they had gotten to him, but being in my business, i
know that a screw can be bribed to do almost anything except get a gun for an 
20
inmate. they didn't make big salaries then, and they don't now. and in those
days there was no electronic locking system, no closed-circuit tv, no
master-switches which controlled whole areas of the prison. back in 1948, each
cellblock had its own turnkey. a guard could have been bribed real easy to let
someone-maybe two or three someones-into the block, and, yes, even into
diamond's cell.
of course a job like that would have cost a lot of money. not by outside
standards, no. prison economics are on a smaller scale. when you've been in here
awhile, a dollar bill in your hand looks like a twenty did outside. my guess is
that, if bogs was done, it cost someone a serious piece of change-fifteen bucks,
we'll say, for the turnkey, and two or three apiece for each of the lump-up
guys.
i'm not saying it was andy dufresne, but i do know that he brought in five
hundred dollars when he came, and he was a banker in the straight world-a man
who understands better than the rest of us the ways in which money can become
power.
and i know this: after the beating-the three broken ribs, the hemorrhaged eye,
the sprained back, and the dislocated hip-bogs diamond left andy alone. in fact,
after that he left everyone pretty much alone. he got to be like a high wind in
the summertime, all bluster and no bite. you could say, in fact, that he turned
into a "weak sister."
that was the end of bogs diamond, a man who might eventually have killed andy if
andy hadn't taken steps to prevent it (if it was him who took the steps). but it
wasn't the end of andy's trouble with the sisters. there was a little hiatus,
and then it began again, although not so hard or so often. jackals like easy
prey, and there were easier pickings around than andy dufresne.
he always fought them, that's what i remember. he knew, i guess, that if you let
them have at you even once without fighting, it got that much easier to let them
have their way without fighting next time. so andy would turn up with bruises on
his face every once in awhile, and there was the matter of the two broken
fingers six or eight months after diamond's beating. oh yes-and sometime in late
1949, the man landed in the infirmary with a broken cheekbone that was probably
the result of someone swinging a nice chunk of pipe with the business-end
wrapped in flannel. he always fought back, and as a result, he did his time in
solitary. but i don't think solitary was the hardship for andy that it was for
some men. he got along with himself.
the sisters was something he adjusted himself to-and then, in 1950, it stopped
almost completely. that is a part of my story that i'll get to in due time. 
21
 v
in the fall of 1948, andy met me one morning in the exercise yard and asked me
if i could get him half a dozen rock-blankets.
"what the hell are those?" i asked.
he told me that was just what rockhounds called them; they were polishing cloths
about the size of dishtowels. they were heavily padded, with a smooth side and a
rough side-the smooth side like fine-grained sandpaper, the rough side almost as
abrasive as industrial steel wool (andy also kept a box of that in his cell,
although he didn't get it from me-i imagine he kited it from the prison
laundry).
i told him i thought we could do business on those, and i ended up getting them
from the very same rock-and-gem shop where i'd arranged to get the rock-hammer.
this time i charged andy my usual ten per cent and not a penny more. i didn't
see anything lethal or even dangerous in a dozen 7" x 7" squares of padded
cloth. rock-blankets, indeed.
it was about five months later that andy asked if i could get him rita hayworth.
that conversation took place in the auditorium, during a movie-show. nowadays we
get the movie-shows once or twice a week, but back then the shows were a monthly
event. usually the movies we got had a morally uplifting message to them, and
this one, the lost weekend, was no different. the moral was that it's dangerous
to drink. it was a moral we could take some comfort in.
andy maneuvered to get next to me, and about halfway through the show he leaned
a little closer and asked if i could get him rita hayworth. i'll tell you the
truth, it kind of tickled me. he was usually cool, calm, and collected, but that
night he was jumpy as hell, almost embarrassed, as if he was asking me to get
him a load of trojans or one of those sheepskin-lined gadgets that are supposed
to "enhance your solitary pleasure," as the magazines put it. he seemed
overcharged, a man on the verge of blowing his radiator.
"i can get her," i said. "no sweat, calm down. you want the big one or the
little one?" at that time rita was my best girl (a few years before it had been
betty grable) and she came in two sizes. for a buck you could get the little
rita. for two-fifty you could have the big rita, four feet high and all woman.
"the big one," he said, not looking at me. i tell you, he was a hot sketch that 
22
night. he was blushing just like a kid trying to get into a kootch show with his
big brother's draft-card. "can you do it?"
"take it easy, sure i can. does a bear shit in the woods?" the audience was
applauding and catcalling as the bugs came out of the walls to get ray milland,
who was having a bad case of the dt's
"how soon?"
"a week. maybe less."
"okay. " but he sounded disappointed, as if he had been hoping had one stuffed
down my pants right then. "how much?"
i quoted him the wholesale price. i could afford to give him this one at cost;
he'd been a good customer, what with his rock-hammer and his rock-blankets.
furthermore, he'd been a good boy-o more than one night when he was having his
problems with bogs rooster, and the rest, i wondered how long it would be before
h used the rock-hammer to crack someone's head open.
posters are a big part of my business, just behind the booze an, cigarettes,
usually half a step ahead of the reefer. in the sixties the business exploded in
every direction, with a lot of people wanting funky hang-ups like jimi hendrix,
bob dylan, that easy rider poster. but mostly it's girls; one pin-up queen after
another.
a few days after andy spoke to me, a laundry driver i did business with back
then brought in better than sixty posters, most of them rita hayworths. you may
even remember the picture; sure do. rita is dressed-sort of-in a bathing suit,
one hand behind her head, her eyes half-closed, those full, sulky red lips
parted. they called it rita hayworth, but they might as well have called it
woman in heat.
the prison administration knows about the black market, in case you were
wondering. sure they do. they probably know almost much about my business as i
do myself. they live with it because they know that a prison is like a big
pressure-cooker, and there has to be vents somewhere to let off steam. they make
the occasion; bust, and i've done time in solitary a time or three over the year
but when it's something like posters, they wink. live and let live and when a
big rita hayworth went up in some fishie's cell, the assumption was that it came
in the mail from a friend or a relative. of course all the care-packages from
friends and relatives are opened and the contents inventoried, but who goes back
and rechecks the inventory sheets for something as harmless as a rita hayworth
or ava gardner pin-up? when you're in a pressure cooker you learn to live and let
live or somebody will carve you a brand-new mouth just above the adam's apple. 
23
you learn to make allowances.
it was ernie again who took the poster up to andy's cell, 14, from my own, 6.
and it was ernie who brought back the note, written in andy's careful hand, just
one word: "thanks."
a little while later, as they filed us out for morning chow, i glanced into his
cell and saw rita over his bunk in all her swimsuited glory, one hand behind her
head, her eyes half-closed, those soft, satiny lips parted. it was over his bunk
where he could look at her nights, after lights-out, in the glow of the arc
sodium lights in the exercise yard.
but in the bright morning sunlight, there were dark slashes across her face-the
shadow of the bars on his single slit window.
 
24
 vi
now i'm going to tell you what happened in mid-may of 1950 that finally ended
andy's three-year series of skirmishes with the sisters. it was also the
incident which eventually got him out of the laundry and into the library, where
he filled out his work-time until he left our happy little family earlier this
year.
you may have noticed how much of what i've told you already is hearsay-someone
saw something and told me and i told you. well, in some cases i've simplified it
even more than it really was, and have repeated (or will repeat) fourth- or
fifth-hand information. that's the way it is here. the grapevine is very real,
and you have to use it if you're going to stay ahead. also, of course, you have
to know how to pick out the grains of truth from the chaff of lies, rumors, and
wish-it-had-beens.
you may also have gotten the idea that i'm describing someone who's more legend
than man, and i would have to agree that there's some truth to that. to us
long-timers who knew andy over a space of years, there was an element of fantasy
to him, a sense, almost, of myth-magic, if you get what i mean. that story i
passed on about andy refusing to give bogs diamond a head-job is part of that
myth, and how he kept on fighting the sisters is part of it, and how he got the
library job is part of it, too . . . but with one important difference: i was
there and i saw what happened, and i swear on my mother's name that it's all
true. the oath of a convicted murderer may not be worth much, but believe this:
i don't lie.
andy and i were on fair speaking terms by then. the guy fascinated me. looking
back to the poster episode, i see there's one thing i neglected to tell you, and
maybe i should. five weeks after he hung rita up (i'd forgotten all about it by
then, and had gone on to other deals), ernie passed a small white box through
the bars of my cell.
"from dufresne," he said, low, and never missed a stroke with his push-broom.
"thanks, ernie," i said, and slipped him half a pack of camels.
now what the hell was this, i was wondering as i slipped the cover from the box.
there was a lot of white cotton inside, and below that . . .
i looked for a long time. for a few minutes it was like i didn't even dare touch
them, they were so pretty. there's a crying shortage of pretty things in the
slam, and the real pity of it is that a lot of men don't even seem to miss them.
there were two pieces of quartz in that box, both of them carefully polished.
they had been chipped into driftwood shapes. there were little sparkles of iron 
25
pyrites in them like flecks of gold. if they hadn't been so heavy, they would
have served as a fine pair of men's cufflinks-they were that close to being a
matched set.
how much work went into creating those two pieces? hours and hours after
lights-out, i knew that. first the chipping and shaping, and then the almost
endless polishing and finishing with those rock-blankets. looking at them, i
felt the warmth that any man or woman feels when he or she is looking at
something pretty, something that has been worked and made-that's the thing that
really separates us from the animals, i think-and i felt something else, too. a
sense of awe for the man's brute persistence. but i never knew just how
persistent andy dufresne could be until much later.
in may of 1950, the powers that be decided that the roof of the license-plate
factory ought to be re-surfaced with roofing tar. they wanted it done before it
got too hot up there, and they asked for volunteers for the work, which was
planned to take about a week. more than seventy men spoke up, because it was
outside work and may is one damn fine month for outside work. nine or ten names
were drawn out of a hat, and two of them happened to be andy's and my own.
for the next week we'd be marched out to the exercise yard after breakfast, with
two guards up front and two more behind . . . plus all the guards in the towers
keeping a weather eye on the proceedings through their field-glasses for good
measure.
four of us would be carrying a big extension ladder on those morning marches - i
always got a kick out of the way dickie betts, who was on that job, called that
sort of ladder an extensible - and we'd put it up against the side of that low,
flat building. then we'd start bucket-brigading hot buckets of tar up to the
roof. spill that shit on you and you'd jitterbug all the way to the infirmary.
there were six guards on the project, all of them picked on the basis of
seniority. it was almost as good as a week's vacation, because instead of
sweating it out in the laundry or the plate-shop or standing over a bunch of
cons cutting pulp or brush somewhere out in the fields, they were having a
regular may holiday in the sun, just sitting there with their backs up against
the low parapet, shooting the bull back and forth.
they didn't even have to keep more than half an eye on us, because the south
wall sentry post was close enough so that the fellows up there could have spit
their chews on us, if they'd wanted to. if anyone on the roof-sealing party had
made one funny move, it would take four seconds to cut him smack in two with
.45-caliber machine-gun bullets. so those screws just sat there and took their
ease. all they needed was a couple of six-packs buried in crushed ice, and they
would have been the lords of all creation.
one of them was a fellow named byron hadley, and in that year of 1950, he'd been 
26
at shawshank longer than i had. longer than the last two wardens put together,
as a matter of fact. the fellow running the show in 1950 was a prissy-looking
down-east yankee named george dunahy. he had a degree in penal administration.
no one liked him, as far as i could tell, except the people who had gotten him his
appointment. i heard that he was only interested in three things: compiling
statistics for a book (which was later published by a small new england outfit
called light side press, where he probably had to pay to have it done), which
team won the intramural baseball championship each september, and getting a
death-penalty law passed in maine. a regular bear for the death penalty was
george dunahy. he was fired from the job in 1953, when it came out he was
running a discount auto-repair service down in the prison garage and splitting
the profits with byron hadley and greg stammas. hadley and stammas came out of
that one okay-they were old hands at keeping their asses covered-but dunahy took
a walk. no one was sorry to see him go, but nobody was exactly pleased to see
greg stammas step into his shoes, either. he was a short man with a tight, hard
gut and the coldest brown eyes you ever saw. he always had a painful, pursed
little grin on his face, as if he had to go to the bathroom and couldn't quite
manage it. during stammas's tenure as warden there was a lot of brutality at
shawshank, and although i have no proof, i believe there were maybe half a dozen
moonlight burials in the stand of scrub forest that lies east of the prison.
dunahy was bad, but greg stammas was a cruel, wretched, cold-hearted man.
he and byron hadley were good friends. as warden, george dunahy was nothing but
a posturing figurehead; it was stammas, and through him, hadley, who actually
administered the prison.
hadley was a tall, shambling man with thinning red hair. he sunburned easily
and he talked loud and if you didn't move fast enough to suit him, he'd clout you
with his stick. on that day, our third on the roof, he was talking to another
guard named mert entwhistle.
hadley had gotten some amazingly good news, so he was griping about it. that was
his style-he was a thankless man with not a good word for anyone, a man who was
convinced that the whole world was against him. the world had cheated him out of
the best years of his life, and the world would be more than happy to cheat him
out of the rest. i have seen some screws that i thought were almost saintly, and
i think i know why that happens -- they are able to see the difference between
their own lives, poor and struggling as they might be, and the lives of the men
they are paid by the state to watch over. these guards are able to formulate a
comparison concerning pain. others can't, or won't.
for byron hadley there was no basis of comparison. he could sit there, cool and
at his ease under the warm may sun, and find the gall to mourn his own good luck
while less than ten feet away a bunch of men were working and sweating and
burning their hands on great big buckets filled with bubbling tar, men who had 
27
to work so hard in their ordinary round of days that this looked like a respite.
you may remember the old question, the one that's supposed to define your
outlook on life when you answer it. for byron hadley the answer would always be
half empty, the glass is half empty. forever and ever, amen. if you gave him a
cool drink of apple cider, he'd think about vinegar. if you told him his wife
had always been faithful to him, he'd tell you it was because she was so damn
ugly.
so there he sat, talking to mert entwhistle loud enough for all of us to hear,
his broad white forehead already starting to redden with the sun. he had one
hand thrown back over the low parapet surrounding the roof. the other was on the
butt of his .38.
we all got the story along with mert. it seemed that hadley's older brother had
gone off to texas some fourteen years ago and the rest of the family hadn't
heard from the son of a bitch since. they had all assumed he was dead, and good
riddance. then, a week and a half ago, a lawyer had called them long-distance
from austin. it seemed that hadley's brother had died four months ago, and a
rich man at that ("it's frigging incredible how lucky some assholes can get,"
this paragon of gratitude on the plate-shop roof said). the money had come as a
result of oil and oil-leases, and there was close to a million dollars.
no, hadley wasn't a millionaire-that might have made even him happy, at least
for awhile-but the brother had left a pretty damned decent bequest of
thirty-five thousand dollars to each surviving member of his family back in
maine, if they could be found. not bad. like getting lucky and winning a
sweepstakes.
but to byron hadley the glass was always half empty. he spent most of the
morning bitching to mert about the bite that the goddam government was going to
take out of his windfall. "they'll leave me about enough to buy a new car with,"
he allowed, "and then what happens? you have to pay the damn taxes on the car,
and the repairs and maintenance, you got your goddam kids pestering you to take
'em for a ride with the top down-"
"and to drive it, if they're old enough," mert said. old mert entwhistle knew
which side his bread was buttered on, and he didn't say what must have been as
obvious to him as to the rest of us: if that money's worrying you so bad, byron
old kid old sock, i'll just take it off your hands. after all, what are friends
for?
"that's right, wanting to drive it, wanting to learn to drive on it, for
chrissake," byron said with a shudder. "then what happens at the end of the
year? if you figured the tax wrong and you don't have enough left over to pay
the overdraft, you got to pay out of your own pocket, or maybe even borrow it
from one of those kikey loan agencies. and they audit you anyway, you know. it 
28
don't matter. and when the government audits you, they always take more. who can
fight uncle sam? he puts his hand inside your shirt and squeezes your tit until
it's purple, and you end up getting the short end. christ."
he lapsed into a morose silence, thinking of what terrible bad luck he'd had to
inherit that thirty-five thousand dollars. andy dufresne had been spreading tar
with a big brush less than fifteen feet away and now he tossed it into his
pail and walked over to where mert and hadley were sitting.
we all tightened up, and i saw one of the other screws, tim youngblood, drag his
hand down to where his pistol was holstered. one of the fellows in the sentry
tower struck his partner on the arm and they both turned, too. for one moment i
thought andy was going to get shot, or clubbed, or both.
then he said, very softly, to hadley: "do you trust your wife?"
hadley just stared at him. he was starting to get red in the face, and i knew
that was a bad sign. in about three seconds he was going to pull his billy club
and give andy the butt end of it right in the solar plexus, where that big bundle
of nerves is. a hard enough hit there can kill you, but they always go for it. if
it doesn't kill you it will paralyze you long enough to forget whatever cute
move it was that you had planned.
"boy," hadley said, "i'll give you just one chance to pick up that brush. and
then you're goin' off this roof on your head."
andy just looked at him, very calm and still. his eyes were like ice. it was as
if he hadn't heard. and i found myself wanting to tell him how it was, to give
him the crash course. the crash course is you never let on that you hear the
guards talking, you never try to horn in on their conversation unless you're
asked (and then you always tell them just what they want to hear and shut up
again). black man, white man, red man, yellow man, in prison it doesn't matter
because we've got our own brand of equality. in prison every con's a low life, and
you have to get used to the idea if you intend to survive men like hadley and
greg stammas, who really would kill you just as soon as look at you. when you're
in stir you belong to the state and if you forget it, woe is you. i've known men
who've lost eyes, men who've lost toes and fingers; i knew one man who lost the
tip of his penis and counted himself lucky that was all he lost. i wanted to
tell andy that it was already too late. he could go back and pick up his brush
and there would still be some big lug waiting for him in the showers that night,
ready to charley-horse both of his legs and leave him writhing on the cement.
you could buy a lug like that for a pack of cigarettes or three baby ruths. most
of all, i wanted to tell him not to make it any worse than it already was.
what i did was to keep on running tar out onto the roof as if nothing at all was 
29
happening. like everyone else, i look after my own ass first. i have to. it's
cracked already, and in shawshank there have always been hadleys willing to
finish the job of breaking it.
andy said, "maybe i put it wrong. whether you trust her or not is immaterial.
the problem is whether or not you believe she would ever go behind your back,
try to hamstring you."
hadley got up. mert got up. tim youngblood got up. hadley's face was as red as
the side of a brick house. "your only problem," he said, "is going to be how many
bones you still got unbroken. you can count them in the infirmary. come on,
mert. we're throwing this sucker over the side."
tim youngblood drew his gun. the rest of us kept tarring like mad. the sun beat
down. they were going to do it; hadley and mert were simply going to pitch him
over the side. terrible accident. dufresne, prisoner 81433-shnk, was taking a
couple of empties down and slipped on the ladder. too bad.
they laid hold of him, mert on the right arm, hadley on the left. andy didn't
resist. his eyes never left hadley's red face.
"if you've got your thumb on her, mr. hadley," he said in that same calm,
composed voice, "there's not a reason why you shouldn't have every cent of that
money. final score, mr. byron hadley thirty-five thousand, uncle sam zip."
mert started to drag him toward the edge.
hadley just stood there. for a moment andy was like a rope between them in a tug-of-war
game. then hadley said, "hold on one second, mert. what do you mean, boy?"
"i mean, if you've got your thumb on your wife, you can give it to her," andy
said.
"you better start making sense, boy, or you're going over."
"the irs allows you a one-time-only gift to your spouse," andy said. "it's good
up to sixty thousand dollars."
hadley was now looking at andy as if he had been poleaxed.
"naw, that ain't right," he said. "tax free?"
"tax free," andy said. "irs can't touch cent one."
"how would you know a thing like that?" 
30
tim youngblood said: "he used to be a banker, byron. i s'pose he might-"
"shut ya head, trout," hadley said without looking at him.
tim youngblood flushed and shut up. some of the guards called him trout because of
his thick lips and buggy eyes. hadley kept looking at andy. "you're the smart
banker who shot his wife. why should i believe a smart banker like you? so i can
wind up in here breaking rocks right alongside you? you'd like that, wouldn't
you?"
andy said quietly: "if you went to jail for tax evasion, you'd go to a federal
penitentiary, not shawshank. but you won't. the tax-free gift to the spouse is a
perfectly legal loophole. i've done dozens . . . no, hundreds of them. it's
meant primarily for people with small businesses to pass on, or for people who
come into one-time-only windfalls. like yourself."
"i think you're lying," hadley said, but he didn't-you could see he didn't.
there was an emotion dawning on his face, something that was grotesque overlying
that long, ugly countenance and that receding, sunburned brow. an almost obscene
emotion when seen on the features of byron hadley. it was hope.
"no, i'm not lying. there's no reason why you should take my word for it,
either. engage a lawyer-"
"ambulance-chasing highway-robbing sob’s!" hadley cried.
andy shrugged. "then go to the irs. they'll tell you the same thing for free.
actually, you don't need me to tell you at all. you would have investigated the
matter for yourself."
"you’re right. i don't need any smart wife-killing banker to show me where the
bears go in the woods."
"you'll need a tax lawyer or a banker to set up the gift for you and that will
cost you something," andy said. "or . . . if you were interested, i'd be glad to
set it up for you nearly free of charge. the price would be three beers apiece
for my co-workers-"
"co-workers," mert said, and let out a rusty guffaw. he slapped his knee. a real
knee-slapper was old mert, and i hope he died of intestinal cancer in a part of
the world where morphine is as of yet undiscovered. "co-workers, ain't that
cute? co-workers! you ain't got any-"
"shut your friggin trap," hadley growled, and mert shut. hadley looked at andy
again. "what was you saying 
31
"i was saying that i'd only ask three beers apiece for my coworkers, if that
seems fair," andy said. "i think a man feels more like a man when he's working
out of doors in the springtime if he can have a bottle of suds. that's only my
opinion. it would go down smooth, and i'm sure you'd have their gratitude."
i have talked to some of the other men who were up there that day - rennie martin,
logan st. pierre, and paul bonsaint were three of them - and we all saw the same
thing then . . . felt the same thing. suddenly it was andy who had the upper
hand. it was hadley who had the gun on his hip and the billy in his hand, hadley
who had his friend greg stammas behind him and the whole prison administration
behind stammas, the whole power of the state behind that, but all at once in
that golden sunshine it didn't matter, and i felt my heart leap up in my chest
as it never had since the truck drove me and four others through the gate back
in 1938 and i stepped out into the exercise yard.
andy was looking at hadley with those cold, clear, calm eyes, and it wasn't just
the thirty-five thousand then, we all agreed on that. i've played it over and
over in my mind and i know. it was man against man, and andy simply forced
him, the way a strong man can force a weaker man's wrist to the table in a game
of indian rasseling. there was no reason, you see, why hadley couldn't've given
mert the nod at that very minute, pitched andy overside onto his head, and still
taken andy's advice. no reason. but he didn't.
"i could get you all a couple of beers if i wanted to," hadley said. "a beer
does taste good while you're working the colossal bastard even managed to sound
magnanimous.
"i'd just give you one piece of advice the irs wouldn't bother with," andy said.
his eyes were axed unwinkingly on hadley's. "make the gift to your wife if
you're sure. if you think there's even a chance she might double-cross you or
backshoot you, we could work out something else -- "
"double-cross me?" hadley asked harshly. "double-cross me? mr. hotshot banker,
if she ate her way through a boxcar of ex-lax, she wouldn't dare fart unless i
gave her the nod."
mert, youngblood, and the other screws yucked it up dutifully. andy never
cracked a smile.
"i'll write down the forms you need," he said. "you can get them at the post
office, and i'll fill them out for your signature."
that sounded suitably important, and hadley's chest swelled. then he glared
around at the rest of us and hollered, "what are you jimmies starin at? move 
32
your asses, goddammit!" he looked back at andy. "you come over here with me,
hotshot. and listen to me well: if you're messin’ me somehow, you're gonna find
yourself chasing your own head around shower c before the week's out."
"yes, i understand that," andy said softly.
and he did understand it. the way it turned out, he understood a lot more than i
did - more than any of us did.
that's how, on the second-to-last day of the job, the convict crew that tarred
the plate-factory roof in 1950 ended up sitting in a row at ten o'clock on a
spring morning, drinking black label beer supplied by the hardest screw that
ever walked a turn at shawshank state prison. that beer was warm, but it
was still the best i ever had in my life. we sat and drank it and felt the sun
on our shoulders, and not even the expression of half-amusement, half-contempt
on hadley's face-as if he were watching apes drink beer instead of men-could
spoil it. it lasted twenty minutes, that beer-break, and for those twenty
minutes we felt like free men. we could have been drinking beer and tarring the
roof of one of our own houses.
only andy didn't drink. i already told you about his drinking habits. he sat
hunkered down in the shade, hands dangling between his knees, watching us and
smiling a little. it's amazing how many men remember him that way, and amazing
how many men were on that work-crew when andy dufresne faced down byron hadley.
i thought there were nine or ten of us, but by 1955 there must have been two
hundred of us, maybe more . . . if you believed what you heard.
so, yeah-if you asked me to give you a flat-out answer to the question of
whether i'm trying to tell you about a man or a legend that got made up around
the man, like a pearl around a little piece of grit-i'd have to say that the
answer lies somewhere in between. all i know for sure is that andy dufresne
wasn't much like me or anyone else i ever knew since i came inside. he brought
in five hundred dollars jammed up his back porch, but somehow that graymeat son
of a bitch managed to bring in something else as well. a sense of his own worth,
maybe, or a feeling that he would be the winner in the end . . . or maybe it was
only a sense of freedom, even inside these goddamned gray walls. it was a kind
of inner light he carried around with him. i only knew him to lose that light
once, and that is also a part of this story.
 vii 
33
by world series time of 1950-this was the year the philadelphia whiz kids
dropped four straight, you will remember-andy was having no more trouble from
the sisters. stammas and hadley had passed the word. if andy dufresne came to
either of them, or any of the other screws that formed a part of their coterie,
and showed so much as a single drop of blood in his underpants, every sister in
shawshank would go to bed that night with a headache. they didn't fight it. as i
have pointed out, there was always an eighteen-year old car thief or a firebug
or some guy who'd gotten his kicks handling little children. after the day on
the plate-shop roof, andy went his way and the sisters went theirs.
he was working in the library then, under a tough old con named brooks hatlen.
hatlen had gotten the job back in the late twenties because he had a college
education. brooksie's degree was in animal husbandry, true enough, but college
educations in institutes of lower learning like the shank are so rare that it's
a case of beggars not being able to be choosers.
in 1952 brooksie, who had killed his wife and daughter after a losing streak at
poker back when coolidge was president, was paroled. as usual, the state in all
its wisdom had let him go long after any chance he might have had to become a
useful part of society was gone. he was sixty-eight and arthritic when he
tottered out of the main gate in his polish suit and his french shoes, his
parole papers in one hand and a greyhound bus ticket in the other. he was crying
when he left. shawshank was his world. what lay beyond its walls was as terrible
to brooks as the western seas had been to superstitious fifteenth-century
sailors. in prison, brooksie had been a person of some importance. he was the
librarian, an educated man. if he went to the kittery library and asked for a
job, they wouldn't even give him a library card. i heard he died in a home for
indigent old folks up freeport way in 1953, and at that he lasted about six
months longer than i thought he would. yeah, i guess the state got its own back
on brooksie, all right. they trained him to like it inside the shithouse and
then they threw him out.
andy succeeded to brooksie's job, and he was librarian for twenty-three years.
he used the same force of will i'd seen him use on byron hadley to get what he
wanted for the library, and i saw him gradually turn one small room (which still
smelled of turpentine because it had been a paint closet until 1922 and had
never been properly aired) lined with reader's digest condensed books and
national geographies into the best prison library in new england.
he did it a step at a time. he put a suggestion box by the door and patiently
weeded out such attempts at humor as more fuk-boox pleeze and excape in 10 ez
lesions. he got hold of the things the prisoners seemed serious about. he wrote
to the major book clubs in new york and got two of them, the literary guild and
the book-of-the-month club, to send editions of all their major selections to us 
34
at a special cheap rate. he discovered a hunger for information on such small
hobbies as soap-carving, woodworking, sleight of hand, and card solitaire. he
got all the books he could on such subjects. and those two jailhouse staples,
erie stanley gardner and louis l'amour. cons never seem to get enough of the
courtroom or the open range. and yes, he did keep a box of fairly spicy
paperbacks under the checkout desk, loaning them out carefully and making sure
they always got back. even so, each new acquisition of that type was quickly
read to tatters.
he began to write to the state senate in augusta in 1954. stammas was warden by
then, and he used to pretend andy was some sort of mascot. he was always in the
library, shooting the bull with andy, and sometimes he'd even throw a paternal
arm around andy's shoulders or give him a goose. he didn't fool anybody. andy
dufresne was no one's mascot.
he told andy that maybe he'd been a banker on the outside, but that part of his
life was receding rapidly into his past and he had better get a hold on the
facts of prison life. as far as that bunch of jumped-up republican rotarians in
augusta was concerned, there were only three viable expenditures of the
taxpayers' money in the field of prisons and corrections. number one was more
walls, number two was more bars, and number three was more guards. as far as the
state senate was concerned, stammas explained, the folks in thomastan and
shawshank and pittsfield and south portland were the scum of the earth. they
were there to do hard time, and by god and sonny jesus, it was hard time they
were going to do. and if there were a few weevils in the bread, wasn't that just
too fucking bad?
andy smiled his small, composed smile and asked stammas what would happen to a
block of concrete if a drop of water fell on it once every year for a million
years. stammas laughed and clapped andy on the back. "you got no million years,
old horse, but if you did, i bleeve you'd do it with that same little grin on
your face. you go on and write your letters. i'll even mail them for you if you
pay for the stamps."
which andy did. and he had the last laugh, although stammas and hadley weren't
around to see it. andy's requests for library funds were routinely turned down
until 1960, when he received a check for two hundred dollars-the senate probably
appropriated it in hopes that he would shut up and go away. vain hope. andy felt
that he had finally gotten one foot in the door and he simply redoubled his
efforts; two letters a week instead of one. in 1962 he got four hundred dollars,
and for the rest of the decade the library received seven hundred dollars a year
like clockwork. by 1971 that had risen to an even thousand. not much stacked up
against what your average small-town library receives, i guess, but a thousand
bucks can buy a lot of recycled perry mason stories and jake logan westerns. by
the time andy left, you could go into the library (expanded from its original 
35
paint-locker to three rooms), and find just about anything you'd want. and if
you couldn't find it, chances were good that andy could get it for you.
now you're asking yourself if all this came about just because andy told byron
hadley how to save the taxes on his windfall inheritance. the answer is yes.
and no. you can probably figure out what happened for yourself.
word got around that shawshank was housing its very own pet financial wizard. in
the late spring and the summer of 1950, andy set up two trust funds for guards
who wanted to assure a college education for their kids, he advised a couple of
others who wanted to take small fliers in common stock (and they did pretty damn
well, as things turned out; one of them did so well he was able to take an early
retirement two years later), and i'll be damned if he didn't advise the warden
himself, old lemon lips george dunahy, on how to go about setting up a
tax-shelter for himself. that was just before dunahy got the bum's rush, and i
believe he must have been dreaming about all the millions his book was going to
make him. by april of 1951, andy was doing the tax returns for half the screws
at shawshank, and by 1952, he was doing almost all of them. he was paid in what
may be a prison's most valuable coin: simple good will.
later on, after greg stammas took over the warden's office, andy became even
more important-but if i tried to tell you the specifics of just how, i'd be
guessing. there are some things i know about and others i can only guess at. i
know that there were some prisoners who received all sorts of special
considerations-radios in their cells, extraordinary visiting privileges, things
like that-and there were people on the outside who were paying for them to have
those privileges. such people are known as "angels" by the prisoners. all at
once some fellow would be excused from working in the plate-shop on saturday
forenoons, and you'd know that fellow had an angel out there who'd coughed up a
chunk of dough to make sure it happened. the way it usually works is that the
angel will pay the bribe to some middle-level screw, and the screw will spread
the grease both up and down the administrative ladder.
then there was the discount auto-repair service that laid warden dunahy low. it
went underground for awhile and then emerged stronger than ever in the late
fifties. and some of the contractors that worked at the prison from time to time
were paying kickbacks to the top administration officials, i'm pretty sure, and
the same was almost certainly true of the companies whose equipment was bought
and installed in the laundry and the license-plate shop and the stamping-mill
that was built in 1963.
by the late sixties there was also a booming trade in pills, and the same
administrative crowd was involved in turning a buck on that. all of it added up
to a pretty good-sized river of illicit income. not like the pile of clandestine
bucks that must fly around a really big prison like attica or san quentin, but 
36
not peanuts, either. and money itself becomes a problem after awhile. you can't
just stuff it into your wallet and then shell out a bunch of crumpled twenties
and dog-eared tens when you want a pool built in your back yard or an addition
put on your house. once you get past a certain point, you have to explain where
that money came from . . . and if your explanations aren't convincing enough,
you're apt to wind up wearing a number yourself.
so there was a need for andy's services. they took him out of the laundry and
installed him in the library, but if you wanted to look at it another way, they
never took him out of the laundry at all. they just set him to work washing
dirty money instead of dirty sheets he funneled it into stocks, bonds, tax-free
municipals, you name it.
he told me once about ten years after that day on the plate-shop roof that his
feelings about what he was doing were pretty clear, and that his conscience was
relatively untroubled. the rackets would have gone on with him or without him.
he had not asked to be sent to shawshank, he went on; he was an innocent man who
had been victimized by colossal bad luck, not a missionary or a do-gooder.
"besides, red," he told me with that same half-grin, "what i'm doing in here
isn't all that different from what i was doing outside. i'll hand you a pretty
cynical axiom: the amount of expert financial help an individual or company
needs rises in direct proportion to how many people that person or business is
screwing.
"the people who run this place are stupid, brutal monsters for the most part.
the people who run the straight world are brutal and monstrous, but they happen
not to be quite as stupid, because the standard of competence out there is a
little higher. not much, but a little. "
"but the pills," i said. "i don't want to tell you your business, but they make
me nervous. reds, uppers, downers, nembutals- now they've got these things they
call phase fours. i won't get anything like that. never have."
"no," andy said. "i don't like the pills, either. never have. but i'm not much
of a one for cigarettes or booze, either. but i don't push the pills. i don't
bring them in, and i don't sell them once they are in. mostly it's the screws
who do that."
"but-"
"yeah, i know. there's a fine line there. what it comes down to, red, is some
people refuse to get their hands dirty at all. that's called sainthood, and the
pigeons land on your shoulders and crap all over your shirt. the other extreme
is to take a bath in the dirt and deal any goddamned thing that will turn a 
37
dollar-guns, switchblades big h. what the hell. you ever have a con come up to
you and offer you a contract?"
i nodded. it's happened a lot of times over the years. you are, after all, the
man who can get it. and they figure if you can get them batteries for their
transistor radios or cartons of luckies or lids of reefer, you can put them in
touch with a guy who'll use a knife. "sure you have," andy agreed. "but you
don't do it. because guys like us, red, we know there's a third choice. an
alternative to staying simon-pure or bathing in the filth and the slime. it's
the alternative that grown-ups all over the world pick. you balance off your
walk through the hog-wallow against what it gains you. you choose the lesser of
two evils and try to keep your good intentions in front of you. and i guess you
judge how well you're doing by how well you sleep at night . . . and what your
dreams are like. "
"good intentions," i said, and laughed. "i know all about that andy. a fellow
can toddle right off to hell on that road."
"don't you believe it," he said, growing somber. "this is hell right here. right
here in the shank. they sell pills and i tell them what to do with the money.
but i've also got the library, and i know of over two dozen guys who have used
the books in there to help them pass their high school equivalency tests. maybe
when they get out of here they'll be able to crawl off the shit heap. when we
needed that second room back in 1957, i got it. because they want to keep me
happy. i work cheap. that's the trade-off."
"and you've got your own private quarters."
"sure. that's the way i like it."
the prison population had risen slowly all through the fifties, and it damn near
exploded in the sixties, what with every college-age kid in america wanting to
try dope and the perfectly ridiculous penalties for the use of a little reefer.
but in all that time andy never had a cellmate, except for a big, silent indian
named normaden (like all indians in the shank, he was called chief), and
normaden didn't last long. a lot of the other long-timers thought andy was
crazy, but andy just smiled. he lived alone and he liked it that way . . . and
as he'd said, they liked to keep him happy. he worked cheap.

prison time is slow time, sometimes you'd swear it's stop-time, but it passes. it passes.
george dunahy departed the scene in a welter of newspaper headlines shouting
scandal and nest-feathering. stammas succeeded him, and for the next six
years shawshank was a kind of living hell. during the reign of greg stammas the beds in
the infirmary and the cells in the solitary wing were always full. 
38
one day in 1958 i looked at myself in a small shaving mirror i kept in my cell
and saw a forty-year-old man looking back at me. a kid had come in back in 1938,
a kid with a big mop of carroty red hair, half-crazy with remorse, thinking
about suicide. that kid was gone. the red hair was going gray and starting to
recede. there were crow's tracks around the eyes. on that day i could see an old
man inside, waiting his time to come out. it scared me. nobody wants to grow old
in stir.
stammas went early in 1959. there had been several investigative reporters
sniffing around, and one of them even did four months under an assumed name, for
a crime made up out of whole cloth. they were getting ready to drag out
scandal and nest-feathering again, but before they could bring the hammer
down on him, stammas ran. i can understand that; boy, can i ever. if he had been tried
and convicted, he could have ended up right in here. if so, he might have lasted all
of five hours. byron hadley had gone two years earlier. the sucker had a heart
attack and took an early retirement.
andy never got touched by the stammas affair. in early 1959 a new warden was
appointed, and a new assistant warden, and a new chief of guards. for the next
eight months or so, andy was just another con again. it was during that period
that normaden, the big half-breed passamaquoddy, shared andy's cell with him.
then everything just started up again. normaden was moved out, and andy was
living in solitary splendor again. the names at the top change, but the rackets
never do.
i talked to normaden once about andy. "nice della," normaden said. it was hard
to make out anything he said because he had a harelip and a cleft palate; his
words all came out in a slush. "i liked it there. he never made fun. but he
didn't want me there. i could tell." big shrug. "i was glad to go, me. bad draft
in that cell. all the time cold. he don't let nobody touch his things. that's
okay. nice man, never made fun. but big draft."

 viii
39
rita hayworth hung in andy's cell until 1955, if i remember right. then it was
marilyn monroe, that picture from the seven-year itch where she's standing over
a subway grating and the warm air is flipping her skirt up. marilyn lasted until
1960, and she was considerably tattered about the edges when andy replaced her
with jayne mansfield. jayne was, you should pardon the expression, a bust. after
only a year or so she was replaced with an english actress-might have been hazel
court, but i'm not sure. in 1966 that one came down and raquel welch went up for
a record breaking six-year engagement in andy's cell. the last poster to hang
there was a pretty country-rock singer whose name was linda ronstadt.
i asked him once what the posters meant to him, and he gave me a peculiar,
surprised sort of look. "why, they mean the same thing to me as they do to most
cons, i guess," he said. "freedom. you look at those pretty women and you feel
like you could almost . . . not quite but almost . . . step right through and be
beside them. be free. i guess that's why i always liked raquel welch the best.
it wasn't just her; it was that beach she was standing on. looked like she was
down in mexico somewhere. someplace quiet, where a man would be able to hear
himself think. didn't you ever feel that way about a picture, red? that you
could almost step right through it?"
i said i'd never really thought of it that way.
"maybe someday you'll see what i mean," he said, and he was right. years later i
saw exactly what he meant . . . and when i did, the first thing i thought of was
normaden, and about how he'd said it was always cold in andy's cell.
a terrible thing happened to andy in late march or early april of 1963. i have
told you that he had something that most of the other prisoners, myself
included, seemed to lack. call it a sense of equanimity, or a feeling of inner
peace, maybe even a constant and unwavering faith that someday the long
nightmare would end.
whatever you want to call it, andy dufresne always seemed to have his act
together. there was none of that sullen desperation about him that seems to
afflict most lifers after awhile; you could never smell hopelessness on him.
until that late winter of '63.
we had another warden by then, a man named samuel norton. the mathers, cotton
and increase, would have felt right at home with sam norton. so far as i know,
no one had ever seen him so much as crack a smile. he had a thirty-year pin from
the baptist advent church of eliot. his major innovation as the head of our
happy family was to make sure that each incoming prisoner had a new testament.
he had a small plaque on his desk, gold letters inlaid in teakwood, which said
christ is my savior. a sampler on the wall, made by his wife, read: 
40
 his judgment cometh and that right early.
this latter sentiment cut zero ice with most of us.
we felt that the judgment had already occurred, and we would be willing to
testify with the best of them that the rock would not hide us nor the dead tree
give us shelter. he had a bible quote for every occasion, did mr. sam norton,
and whenever you meet a man like that, my best advice to you would be to grin
big and cover up your balls with both hands.
there were less infirmary cases than in the days of greg stammas, and so far as
i know the moonlight burials ceased altogether, but this is not to say that
norton was not a believer in punishment. solitary was always well populated. men
lost their teeth not from beatings but from bread and water diets. it began to
be called grain and drain, as in "i'm on the sam norton grain and drain train,
boys."
the man was the foulest hypocrite that i ever saw in a high position. the
rackets i told you about earlier continued to flourish, but sam norton added his
own new wrinkles. andy knew about them all, and because we had gotten to be
pretty good friends by that time, he let me in on some of them. when andy talked
about them, an expression of amused, disgusted wonder would come over his face,
as if he were telling me about some ugly, predatory species of bug that was, by
its very ugliness and greed, somehow more comic than terrible.
it was warden norton who instituted the "inside-out" program you may have read
about some sixteen or seventeen years back; it was even written up in newsweek.
in the press it sounded like a real advance in practical corrections and
rehabilitation. there were prisoners out cutting pulpwood, prisoners repairing
bridges and causeways, prisoners constructing potato cellars. norton called it
"inside-out" and was invited to explain it to damn near every rotary and kiwanis
club in new england, especially after he got his picture in newsweek. the
prisoners called it "road-ganging," but so far as i know, none of them were ever
invited to express their views to the kiwanians or the loyal order of moose.
norton was right in there on every operation, thirty-year churchpin and all;
from cutting pulp to digging storm-drains to laying new culverts under state
highways, there was norton, skimming off the top. there were a hundred ways to
do it-men, materials, you name it. but he had it coming another way, as well.
the construction businesses in the area were deathly afraid of norton's
inside-out program, because prison labor is slave labor, and you can't compete
with that. so sam norton, he of the testaments and the thirty-year church-pin,
was passed a good many thick envelopes under the table during his sixteen-year
tenure as shawshank's warden. and when an envelope was passed, he would either 
41
overbid the project, not bid at all, or claim that all his inside-outers were
committed elsewhere. it has always been something of a wonder to me that norton
was never found in the trunk of a thunderbird parked off a highway somewhere
down in massachusetts with his hands tied behind his back and half a dozen
bullets in his head.
anyway, as the old barrelhouse song says, my god, how the money rolled in.
norton must have subscribed to the old puritan notion that the best way to
figure out which folks god favors is by checking their bank accounts.
andy dufresne was his right hand in all of this, his silent partner. the prison
library was andy's hostage to fortune. norton knew it, and norton used it. andy
told me that one of norton's favorite aphorisms was one hand washes the other.
so andy gave good advice and made useful suggestions. i can't say for sure that
he handtooled norton's inside-out program, but i'm damned sure he processed the
money for the jesus-shouting son of a whore. he gave good advice, made useful
suggestions, the money got spread around, and . . . son of a bitch! the library
would get a new set of automotive repair manuals, a fresh set of grolier
encyclopedias, books on how to prepare for the scholastic achievement tests.
and, of course, more erle stanley gardners and more louis l'amours.
and i'm convinced that what happened happened because norton just didn't want to
lose his good right hand. i'll go further: it happened because he was scared of
what might happen-what andy might say against him-if andy ever got clear of
shawshank state prison.
i got the story a chunk here and a chunk there over a space of seven years, some
of it from andy-but not all. he never wanted to talk about that part of his
life, and i don't blame him. i got parts of it from maybe half a dozen different
sources. i've said once that prisoners are nothing but slaves, but they have
that slave habit of looking dumb and keeping their ears open. i got it backwards
and forwards and in the middle, but i'll give it to you from point a to point z.
and maybe you'll understand why the man spent about ten months in a bleak,
depressed daze. see, i don't think he knew the truth until 1963, fifteen years
after he came into this sweet little hellhole. until he met tommy williams, i
don't think he knew how bad it could get.
tommy williams joined our happy little shawshank family in november of 1962.
tommy thought of himself as a native of massachusetts, but he wasn't proud; in
his twenty-seven years he'd done time all over new england. he was a
professional thief, and as you may have guessed, my own feeling was that he
should have picked another profession.
he was a married man, and his wife came to visit each and every week. she had an
idea that things might go better with tommy- and consequently better with their 
42
three-year-old son and herself- if he got his high school degree. she talked him
into it, and so tommy williams started visiting the library on a regular basis.
for andy, this was an old routine by then. he saw that tommy got a series of
high school equivalency tests. tommy would brush up on the subjects he had
passed in high school-there weren't many-and then take the test. andy also saw
that he was enrolled in a number of correspondence courses covering the subjects
he had failed in school or just missed by dropping out.
he probably wasn't the best student andy ever took over the jumps, and i don't
know if he ever did get his high school diploma, but that forms no part of my
story. the important thing was that he came to like andy dufresne very much, as
most people did after awhile.
on a couple of occasions he asked andy "what a smart guy like you is doing in
the joint"-a question which is the rough equivalent of that one that goes
"what's a nice girl like you doing in a place like this?" but andy wasn't the
type to tell him; he would only smile and turn the conversation into some other
channel. quite normally, tommy asked someone else, and when he finally got the
story, i guess he also got the shock of his young life.
the person he asked was his partner on the laundry's steam ironer and folder.
the inmates call this device the mangler, because that's exactly what it will do
to you if you aren't paying attention and get your bad self caught in it. his
partner was charlie lathrop, who had been in for about twelve years on a murder
charge. he was more than glad to reheat the details of the dufresne murder trial
for tommy; it broke the monotony of pulling freshly pressed bedsheets out of the
machine and tucking them into the basket. he was just getting to the jury
waiting until after lunch to bring in their guilty verdict when the trouble
whistle went off and the mangle grated to a stop. they had been feeding in
freshly washed sheets from the eliot nursing home at the far end; these were
spat out dry and neatly pressed at tommy's and charlie's end at the rate of one
every five seconds. their job was to grab them, fold them, and slap them into
the cart, which had already been lined with clean brown paper.
but tommy williams was just standing there, staring at charlie lathrop, his
mouth unhinged all the way to his chest. he was standing in a drift of sheets
that had come through clean and which were now sopping up all the wet muck on
the floor-and in a laundry wetwash, there's plenty of muck.
so the head bull that day, homer jessup, comes rushing over, bellowing his head
off and on the prod for trouble. tommy took no notice of him. he spoke to
charlie as if old homer, who had busted more heads than he could probably count,
hadn't been there. 
43
"what did you say that golf pro's name was?"
"quentin," charlie answered back, all confused and upset by now. he later said
that the kid was as white as a truce flag. "glenn quentin, i think. something
like that, anyway-"
"here now, here now," homer jessup roared, his neck as red as a roosters comb.
"get them sheets in cold water! get quick! get quick, by jesus, you-"
"glenn quentin, oh my god," tommy williams said, and that was all he got to say
because homer jessup, that least peaceable of men, brought his billy down behind
his ear. tommy hit the floor so hard he broke off three of his front teeth. when
he woke up he was in solitary, and confined to same for a week, riding a boxcar
on sam norton's famous grain and drain train. plus a black mark on his report
card.
that was in early february of 1963, and tommy williams went around to six or
seven other long-timers after he got out of solitary and got pretty much the
same story. i know; i was one of them. but when i asked him why he wanted it, he
just clammed up.
then one day he went to the library and spilled one helluva big budget of
information to andy dufresne. and for the first and last time, at least since he
had approached me about the rita hayworth poster like a kid buying his first
pack of trojans, andy lost his cool . . . only this time he blew it entirely.
i saw him later that day, and he looked like a man who has stepped on the
business end of a rake and given himself a good one, whap between the eyes. his
hands were trembling, and when i spoke to him, he didn't answer. before that
afternoon was out he had caught up with billy hanlon, who was the head screw,
and set up an appointment with warden norton for the following day. he told me
later that he didn't sleep a wink all that night; he just listened to a cold
winter wind howling outside, watched the searchlights go around and around,
putting long, moving shadows on the cement walls of the cage he had called home
since harry truman was president, and tried to think it all out. he said it was
as if tommy had produced a key which fit a cage in the back of his mind, a cage
like his own cell. only instead of holding a man, that cage held a tiger, and
that tiger's name was hope. williams had produced the key that unlocked the cage
and the tiger was out, willy-nilly, to roam his brain.
four years before, tommy williams had been arrested in rhode island, driving a
stolen car that was full of stolen merchandise. tommy turned in his accomplice,
the da played ball, and he got a lighter sentence . . . two to four, with time
served. eleven months after beginning his term, his old cellmate got a ticket
out and tommy got a new one, a man named elwood blatch. blatch had been busted 
44
for burglary with a weapon and was serving six to twelve.
"i never seen such a high-strung guy," tommy told me. "a man like that should
never want to be a burglar, specially not with a gun. the slightest little
noise, he'd go three feet into the air . . . and come down shooting, more likely
than not. one night he almost strangled me because some guy down the hall was
whopping on his cell bars with a tin cup.
"i did seven months with him, until they let me walk free. i got time served and
time off, you understand. i can't say we talked because you didn't, you know,
exactly hold a conversation with el blatch. he held a conversation with you. he
talked all the time. never shut up. if you tried to get a word in, he'd shake
his fist at you and roll his eyes. it gave me the cold chills whenever he done
that. big tall guy he was, mostly bald, with these green eyes set way down deep
in the sockets. jeez, i hope i never see him again.
"it was like a talkin jag every night. where he grew up, the orphanages he run
away from, the jobs he done, the women he fucked, the crap games he cleaned out.
i just let him run on. my face ain't much, but i didn't want it, you know,
rearranged for me.
"according to him, he'd burgled over two hundred joints. it was hard for me to
believe, a guy like him who went off like a firecracker every time someone cut a
loud fart, but he swore it was true. now . . . listen to me, red. i know guys
sometimes make things up after they know a thing, but even before i knew about
this golf pro guy, quentin, i remember thinking that if el blatch ever burgled
my house, and i found out about it later, i'd have to count myself just about
the luckiest motherfucker going still to be alive. can you imagine him in some
lady's bedroom, sifting through her jool'ry box, and she coughs in her sleep or
turns over quick? it gives me the cold chills just to think of something like
that, i swear on my mother's name it does.
"he said he'd killed people, too. people that gave him shit. at least that's
what he said. and i believed him. he sure looked like a man that could do some
killing. he was just so fucking highstrung! like a pistol with a sawed-off
firing pin. i knew a guy who had a smith and wesson police special with a
sawed-off firing pin. it wasn't no good for nothing, except maybe for something
to jaw about. the pull on that gun was so light that it would fire if this guy,
johnny callahan, his name was, if he turned his record-player on full volume and
put it on top of one of the speakers. that's how el blatch was. i can't explain
it any better. i just never doubted that he had greased some people.
"so one night, just for something to say, i go: 'who'd you kill?' like a joke,
you know. so he laughs and says: 'there's one guy doing time up-maine for these
two people i killed. it was this guy and the wife of the slob who's doing the 
45
time. i was creeping their place and the guy started to give me some shit.'
"i can't remember if he ever told me the woman's name or not," tommy went on.
"maybe he did. but in new england, dufresne's like smith or jones in the rest of
the country, because there's so many frogs up here. dufresne, lavesque,
ouelette, poulin, who can remember frog names? but he told me the guy's name. he
said the guy was glenn quentin and he was a prick, a big rich prick, a golf pro.
el said he thought the guy might have cash in the house, maybe as much as five
thousand dollars. that was a lot of money back then, he says to me. so i go:
'when was that?' and he goes: 'after the war. just after the war.'
"so he went in and he did the joint and they woke up and the guy gave him some
trouble. that's what el said. maybe the guy just started to snore, that's what i
say. anyway, el said quentin was in the sack with some hotshot lawyer's wife and
they sent the lawyer up to shawshank state prison. then he laughs this big
laugh. holy christ, i was never so glad of anything as i was when i got my
walking papers from that place."
 ix
46
i guess you can see why andy went a little wonky when tommy told him that story,
and why he wanted to see the warden right away. elwood blatch had been serving a
six-to-twelve rap when tommy knew him four years before. by the time andy heard
all of this, in 1963, he might be on the verge of getting out . . . or already
out. so those were the two prongs of the spit andy was roasting on-the idea that
blatch might still be in on one hand, and the very real possibility that he
might be gone like the wind on the other.
there were inconsistencies in tommy's story, but aren't there always in real
life? blatch told tommy the man who got sent up was a hotshot lawyer, and andy
was a banker, but those are two professions that people who aren't very educated
could easily get mixed up. and don't forget that twelve years had gone by
between the time blatch was reading the clippings about the trial and the time
he told the tale to tommy williams. he also told tommy he got better than a
thousand dollars from a footlocker quentin had in his closet, but the police
said at andy's trial that there had been no sign of burglary. i have a few ideas
about that. first, if you take the cash and the man it belonged to is dead, how
are you going to know anything was stolen, unless someone else can tell you it
was there to start with? second, who's to say blatch wasn't lying about that
part of it? maybe he didn't want to admit killing two people for nothing. third,
maybe there were signs of burglary and the cops either overlooked them-cops can
be pretty dumb-or deliberately covered them up so they wouldn't screw the da's
case. the guy was running for public office, remember, and he needed a
conviction to run on. an unsolved burglary-murder would have done him no good at
all.
but of the three, i like the middle one best. i've known a few elwood blatches
in my time at shawshank-the trigger-pullers with the crazy eyes. such fellows
want you to think they got away with the equivalent of the hope diamond on every
caper, even if they got caught with a two-dollar timex and nine bucks on the one
they're doing time for.
and there was one thing in tommy's story that convinced andy beyond a shadow of
a doubt. blatch hadn't hit quentin at random. he had called quentin "a big rich
prick," and he had known quentin was a golf pro. well, andy and his wife had
been going out to that country club for drinks and dinner once or twice a week
for a couple of years, and andy had done a considerable amount of drinking there
once he found out about his wife's affair. there was a marina with the country
club, and for awhile in 1947 there had been a part-time grease-and-gas jockey
working there who matched tommy's description of elwood blatch. a big tall man,
mostly bald, with deep-set green eyes. a man who had an unpleasant way of
looking at you, as though he was sizing you up. he wasn't there long, andy said.
either he quit or briggs, the fellow in charge of the marina, fired him. but he
wasn't a man you forgot. he was too striking for that. 
47
so andy went to see warden norton on a rainy, windy day with big gray clouds
scudding across the sky above the gray walls, a day when the last of the snow
was starting to melt away and show lifeless patches of last year's grass in the
fields beyond the prison.
the warden has a good-sized office in the administration wing, and behind the
warden's desk there's a door which connects with the assistant warden's office..
the assistant warden was out that day, but a trusty was there. he was a
half-lame fellow whose real name i have forgotten; all the inmates, me included,
called him chester, after marshal dillon's sidekick. chester was supposed to be
watering the plants and waxing the floor. my guess is that the plants went
thirsty that day and the only waxing that was done happened because of chester's
dirty ear polishing the keyhole plate of that connecting door.
he heard the warden's main door open and close and then norton saying: "good
morning, dufresne, how can i help you?"
"warden," andy began, and old chester told us that he could hardly recognize
andy's voice it was so changed. "warden. . . there's something . . . something's
happened to me that's . . . that's so . . . so . . . i hardly know where to
begin."
"well, why don't you just begin at the beginning?" the warden said, probably in
his sweetest let's-all-turn-to- the-twenty-third- psalm-and-read-in-unison
voice. "that usually works the best."
and so andy did. he began by refreshing norton on the details of the crime he
had been imprisoned for. then he told the warden exactly what tommy williams had
told him. he also gave out tommy's name, which you may think wasn't so wise in
light of later developments, but i'd just ask you what else he could have done,
if his story was to have any credibility at all.
when he had finished, norton was completely silent for some time. i can just see
him, probably tipped back in his office chair under the picture of governor reed
hanging on the wall, his fingers steepled, his liver lips pursed, his brow
wrinkled into ladder rungs halfway to the crown of his head, his thirty-year pin
gleaming mellowly.
"yes," he said finally. "that's the damnedest story i ever heard. but i'll tell
you what surprises me most about it, dufresne."
"what's that, sir?"
"that you were taken in by it." 
48
"sir? i don't understand what you mean." and chester said that andy dufresne,
who had faced down byron hadley on the plate-shop roof thirteen years before, was
almost floundering for words.
"well, now," norton said. "it's pretty obvious to me that this young fellow williams is
impressed with you. quite taken with you, as a matter of fact. he hears your tale of woe,
and it's quite natural of him to want to . . . cheer you up, let's say. quite natural. he's a
young man, not terribly bright. not surprising he didn't realize what a state it would put
you into. now what i suggest is-"
"don't you think i thought of that?" andy asked. "but i'd never told tommy about
the man working down at the marina. i never told anyone that-it never even crossed my
mind! but tommy's description of his cellmate and that man . . . they're identical!"
"well, now, you may be indulging in a little selective perception there," norton
said with a chuckle. phrases like that, selective perception, are required learning for people
in the penology and corrections business, and they use them all they can.
"that's not it at all. sir."
"that's your slant on it," norton said, "but mine differs. and let's remember that i have
only your word that there was such a man working at the falmouth hills country club
back then."
"no, sir," andy broke in again. "no, that isn't true. because-"
"anyway," norton overrode him, expansive and loud, "let's just look at it from the other
end of the telescope, shall we? suppose- just suppose, now-that there really was a fellow
named elwood blotch. "
"blatch," andy said tightly.
"blatch, by all means. and let's say he was thomas william's cellmate in rhode island.
the chances are excellent that he has been released by now. excellent. why, we don't even
know how much time he might have done there before he ended up with williams, do we?
only that he was doing a six-to-twelve."
"no. we don't know how much time he'd done. but tommy said he was a bad actor, a
cut-up. i think there's a fair chance that he may still be in. even if he's been released, the
prison will have a record of his last known address, the names of his relatives-"
"and both would almost certainly be dead ends."
andy was silent for a moment, and then he burst out: "well, it's a chance, isn't it?" 
49
"yes, of course it is. so just for a moment, dufresne, let's assume that blatch exists and
that he is still safely ensconced in the rhode island state penitentiary. now what is he
going to say if we bring this kettle of fish to him in a bucket? is he going to fall down on
his knees, roll his eyes, and say: 'i did it! i did it! by all means add a life term onto my
charge!'?"
"how can you be so obtuse?" andy said, so low that chester could barely hear. but he
heard the warden just fine.
"what? what did you call me?"
"obtuse.'" andy cried. "is it deliberate?"
"dufresne, you've taken five minutes of my time-no, seven- and i have a very busy
schedule today. so i believe we'll just declare this little meeting closed and-"
"the country club will have all the old time-cards, don't you realize that?" andy shouted.
"they'll have tax-forms and w-twos and unemployment compensation forms, all with his
name on them! there will be employees there now that were there then, maybe briggs
himself! it's been fifteen years, not forever! they'll remember him! they will remember
blatch.' if i've got tommy to testify to what blatch told him, and briggs to testify that
blatch was there, actually working at the country club, i can get a new trial! i can-"
"guard! guard.' take this man away!"
"what's the matter with you?" andy said, and chester told me he was very nearly
screaming by then. "it's my life, my chance to get out, don't you see that? and you won't
make a single long-distance call to at least verify tommy's story? listen, i'll pay for the
call! i'll pay for-"
then there was a sound of thrashing as the guards grabbed him and started to drag him
out.
"solitary," warden norton said dryly. he was probably fingering his thirty-year pin as he
said it. "bread and water."
and so they dragged andy away, totally out of control now, still screaming at the warden;
chester said you could hear him even after the door was shut: "it's my life! it's my life,
don't you understand it's my life? "
twenty days on the grain and drain train for andy down there in solitary. it was his
second jolt in solitary, and his dust-up with norton was his first real black mark since he
had joined our happy little family.
i'll tell you a little bit about shawshank's solitary while we're on the subject. it's something
of a throwback to those hardy pioneer days of the early to mid-1700s in maine. in those 
50
days no one wasted much time with such things as "penology" and rehabilitation" and
"selective perception." in those days, you were taken care of in terms of absolute black
and white. you were either guilty or innocent. if you were guilty, you were either hung or
put in jail. and if you were sentenced to jail, you did not go to an institution. no, you dug
your own jail with a spade provided by the province of maine. you dug it as wide and as
deep as you could during the period between sunup and sundown. then they gave you a
couple of skins and a bucket, and down you went. once down, the gazer would bar the
top of your hole, throw down some grain or maybe a piece of maggoty meat once or twice
a week, and maybe there would be a dipperful of barley soup on sunday night. you
pissed in the bucket, and you held up the same bucket for water when the gazer came
around at six in the morning. when it rained, you used the bucket to bail out your jail-cell
. . . unless, that is, you wanted to drown like a rat in a rain barrel.
no one spent a long time "in the hole," as it was called; thirty months was an unusually
long term, and so far as i've been able to tell, the longest term ever spent from which an
inmate actually emerged alive was served by the so-called "durham boy," a fourteen-yearold
psychopath who castrated a schoolmate with a piece of rusty metal. he did seven
years, but of course he went in young and strong.
you have to remember that for a crime that was more serious than petty theft or
blasphemy or forgetting to put a snot rag in your pocket when out of doors on the
sabbath, you were hung. for low crimes such as those just mentioned and for others like
them, you'd do your three or six or nine months in the hole and come out fishbelly white,
cringing from the wide-open spaces, your eyes half blind, your teeth more than likely
rocking and rolling in their sockets from the scurvy, your feet crawling with fungus. jolly
old province of maine. yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum.
shawshank's solitary wing was nowhere as bad as that . . . i guess. things come in three
major degrees in the human experience, i think. there's good, bad, and terrible. and as
you go down into progressive darkness toward terrible, it gets harder and harder to make
subdivisions.
to get to solitary wing you were led down twenty-three steps to a basement level where
the only sound was the drip of water. the only light was supplied by a series of dangling
sixty-watt bulbs. the cells were keg-shaped, like those wall-safes rich people sometimes
hide behind a picture. like a safe, the round doorways were hinged, and solid instead of
barred. you got ventilation from above, but no light except for your own sixty-watt bulb,
which was turned off from a master-switch promptly at 8:00 p.m., an hour before lightsout
in the rest of the prison. the light bulb wasn't in a wire mesh cage or anything like
that. the feeling was that if you wanted to exist down there in the dark, you were
welcome to it. not many did . . . but after eight, of course, you had no choice. you had a
bunk bolted to the wall and a can with no toilet seat. you had three ways to spend your
time: sitting, shitting, or sleeping. big choice.
twenty days could get to seem like a year. thirty days could seem like two, and forty 
51
days like ten. sometimes you could hear rats in the ventilation system. in a situation like
that, subdivisions of terrible tend to get lost.
if anything at all can be said in favor of solitary, it's just that you get time to think. andy
had twenty days in which to think while he enjoyed his grain and drain, and when he got
out he requested another meeting with the warden. request denied. such a meeting, the
warden told him, would be "counter-productive." that's another of those phrases you have
to master before you can go to work in the prisons and corrections held.
patiently, andy renewed his request. and renewed it. and renewed it. he had changed,
had andy dufresne. suddenly, as that spring of 1963 bloomed around us, there were lines
in his face and sprigs of gray showing in his hair. he had lost that little trace of a smile that
always seemed to linger around his mouth. his eyes stared out into space more often, and
you get to know that when a man stares that way, he is counting up the years served, the
months, the weeks, the days.
 x
 
52
he renewed his request and renewed it. he was patient. he had nothing but time. it got to
be summer. in washington, president kennedy was promising a fresh assault on poverty
and on civil rights inequalities, not knowing he had only half a year to live. in liverpool, a
musical group called the beatles was emerging as a force to be reckoned with in british
music, but i guess that no one stateside had yet heard of them. the boston red sox, still
four years away from what new england folks call the miracle of '67, were languishing in
the cellar of the american league. all of those things were going on out in a larger world
where people walked free.
norton saw him near the end of june, and this conversation i heard about from andy
himself some seven years later.
"if it's the squeeze, you don't have to worry," andy told norton in a low voice. "do you
think i'd talk that up? i'd be cutting my own throat. i'd be just as indictable as -- "
"that's enough," norton interrupted. his face was as long and cold as a slate gravestone.
he leaned back in his office chair until the back of his head almost touched the sampler
reading his judgment cometh and that right early.
"but-"
"don't you ever mention money to me again," norton said. "not in this office, not
anywhere. not unless you want to see that library turned back into a storage room and
paint-locker again. do you understand?"
"i was trying to set your mind at ease, that's all."
"well, now, when i need a sorry son of a bitch like you to set my mind at ease, i'll retire. i
agreed to this appointment because i got tired of being pestered, dufresne. i want it to
stop. if you want to buy this particular brooklyn bridge, that's your affair. don't make it
mine. i could hear crazy stories like yours twice a week if i wanted to lay myself open to
them. every sinner in this place would be using me for a crying towel. i had more respect
for you. but this is the end. the end. have we got an understanding?"
"yes," andy said. "but i'll be hiring a lawyer, you know."
"what in god's name for?"
"i think we can put it together," andy said. "with tommy williams and with my
testimony and corroborative testimony from records and employees at the country club, i
think we can put it together. "
"tommy williams is no longer an inmate of this facility."
"what?" 
53
"he's been transferred."
"transferred where?"
"cashman. "
at that, andy fell silent. he was an intelligent man, but it would have taken an
extraordinarily stupid man not to smell deal all over that. cashman was a minimumsecurity
prison far up north in aroostook county. the inmates pick a lot of potatoes, and
that's hard work, but they are paid a decent wage for their labor and they can attend
classes at cvi, a pretty decent vocational-technical institute, if they so desire. more
important to a fellow like tommy, a fellow with a young wife and a child, cashman had a
furlough program . . . which meant a chance to live like a normal man, at least on the
weekends. a chance to build a model plane with his kid, have sex with his wife, maybe go
on a picnic.
norton had almost surely dangled all of that under tommy's nose with only one
string attached: not one more word about elwood blatch, not now, not ever. or
you'll end up doing hard time in thomaston down there on scenic route 1 with the
real hard guys, and instead of having sex with your wife you'll be having it
with some old bull queer.
"but why?" andy said. "why would-"
"as a favor to you," norton said calmly, "i checked with rhode island. they did
have an inmate named elwood blatch. he was given what they call a pp-provisional
parole, another one of these crazy liberal programs to put criminals out on the
streets. he's since disappeared. "
andy said: "the warden down there . . . is he a friend of yours?"
sam norton gave andy a smile as cold as a deacon's watch chain. "we are
acquainted," he said.
"why?" andy repeated. "can't you tell me why you did it? you knew i wasn't going
to talk about . . . about anything you might have had going. you knew that. so
why?"
"because people like you make me sick," norton said deliberately. "i like you
right where you are, mr. dufresne, and as long as i am warden here at shawshank,
you are going to be right here. you see, you used to think that you were better
than anyone else. i have gotten pretty good at seeing that on a man's face. i
marked it on yours the first time i walked into the library. it might as well
have been written on your forehead in capital letters. that look is gone now, 
54
and i like that just fine. it is not just that you are a useful vessel, never
think that. it is simply that men like you need to learn humility. why, you used
to walk around that exercise yard as if it was a living room and you were at one
of those cocktail parties where the hellbound walk around coveting each others'
wives and husbands and getting swinishly drunk. but you don't walk around that
way anymore. and i'll be watching to see if you should start to walk that way
again. over a period of years, i'll be watching you ,with great pleasure. now
get the hell out of here."
"okay. but all the extracurricular activities stop now, norton the investment
counseling, the scams, the free tax advice. it all stops. get h and r block to
tell you how to declare your income.
warden norton's face first went brick-red . . . and then all the color fell out
of it. "you're going back into solitary for that. thirty days. bread and water.
another black mark. and while you're in think about this: if anything that's
been going on should stop, the library goes. i will make it my personal business
to see that it got back to what it was before you came here. and i will make you
life . . . very hard. very difficult. you'll do the hardest time it possible to
do. you'll lose that one-bunk hilton down in cellblock five, for starters, and
you'll lose those rocks on the windowsill, an you'll lose any protection the
guards have given you against the sodomites. you will . . . lose everything.
clear?"
i guess it was clear enough.
 xi 
55
time continued to pass-the oldest trick in the world, an maybe the only one that
really is magic. but andy dufresne ha changed. he had grown harder. that's the
only way i can think ( to put it. he went on doing warden norton's dirty work
and f held onto the library, so outwardly things were about the same. h
continued to have his birthday drinks and his year-end holiday drinks; he
continued to share out the rest of each bottle. i got his fresh rock polishing
cloths from time to time, and in 1967 i g him a new rock-hammer-the one i'd
gotten him nineteen yea ago had, as i told you, plumb worn out. nineteen years.'
when you say it sudden like that, those three syllables sound like the thud and
double locking of a tomb door. the rock-hammer, which had bee a ten dollar item
back then, went for twenty-two by '67. he and had a sad little grin over that.
andy continued to shape and polish the rocks he found in the exercise yard, but
the yard was smaller by then; half of what he been there in 1950 had been
asphalted over in 1962. nonetheless he found enough to keep him occupied, i
guess. when he hi finished with each rock he would put it carefully on his winds
ledge, which faced east. he told me he liked to look at them in the sun, the
pieces of the planet he had taken up from the dirt and shaped. schists,
quartzes, granites. funny little mica-sculptures that were held together with
airplane glue. various sedimentary conglomerates that were polished and cut in
such a way that you could see why andy called them "millennium sandwiches"-the
layers of different material that had built up over a period of decades and
centuries.
andy would give his stones and his rock-sculptures away from time to time in
order to make room for new ones. he gave me the greatest number, i
think-counting the stones that looked like matched cufflinks, i had five. there
was one of the mica sculptures i told you about, carefully crafted to look like a
man throwing a javelin, and two of the sedimentary conglomerates, all the levels
showing in smoothly polished cross-section. i've still got them, and i take them
down every so often and think about what a man can do, if he has time enough and
the will to use it, a drop at a time.
so, on the outside, at least, things were about the same. if norton had wanted
to break andy as badly as he had said, he would have had to look below the
surface to see the change. but if he had seen how different andy had become, i
think norton would have been well-satisfied with the four years following his
clash with andy.
he had told andy that andy walked around the exercise yard as if he were at a
cocktail party. that isn't the way i would have put it, but i know what he
meant. it goes back to what i said about andy wearing his freedom like an
invisible coat, about how he never really developed a prison mentality. his eyes
never got that dull look. he never developed the walk that men get when the day
is over and they are going back to their cells for another endless night-that 
56
flat-footed, hump-shouldered walk. andy walked with his shoulders squared, and
his step was always light, as if he were heading home to a good home-cooked meal
and a good woman instead of to a tasteless mess of soggy vegetables, lumpy
mashed potato, and a slice or two of that fatty, gristly stuff most of the cons
called mystery meat . . . that, and a picture of raquel welch on the wall.
but for those four years, although he never became exactly like the others he
did become silent, introspective, and brooding. who could blame him? so maybe it
was warden norton who was pleased . . . at least, for awhile.
his dark mood broke around the time of the 1967 world series. that was the dream
year, the year the red sox won the pennant instead of placing ninth, as the las
vegas bookies had predicted. when it happened-when they won the american league
pennant -a kind of ebullience engulfed the whole prison. there was a goofy sort
of feeling that if the dead sox could come to life, then maybe anybody could do
it. i can't explain that feeling now, any more than an ex-beatlemaniac could
explain that madness, i suppose. but it was real. every radio in the place was
tuned to the games as the red sox pounded down the stretch. there was gloom when
the sox dropped a pair in cleveland near the end, and a nearly riotous joy when
rico petrocelli put away the pop fly that clinched it. and then there was the
gloom that came when lonborg was beaten in the seventh game of the series to end
the dream just sort of complete fruition. it probably pleased norton to no end,
the son of a bitch. he liked his prison wearing sackcloth and ashes.
but for andy, there was no tumble back down into gloom. he wasn't much of a
baseball fan anyway, and maybe that was why. nevertheless, he seemed to have
caught the current of good feeling, and for him it didn't peter out again after
the last game of the series. he had taken that invisible coat out of the closet
and put it on again.
i remember one bright-gold fall day in very late october, a couple of weeks
after the world series had ended. it must have been a sunday, because the
exercise yard was full of men "walking off the week"-tossing a frisbee or two,
passing around a football, bartering what they had to barter. others would be at
the long table in the visitors' hall, under the watchful eyes of the screws,
talking with their relatives, smoking cigarettes, telling sincere lies,
receiving their picked-over care-packages.
andy was squatting indian fashion against the wall, chunking two small rocks
together in his hands, his face turned up into the sunlight. it was surprisingly
warm, that sun, for a day so late in the year.
"hello, red," he called. "come on and sit a spell."
i did. 
57
"you want this?" he asked, and handed me one of the two carefully polished
"millennium sandwiches" i just told you about
"i sure do," i said. "it's very pretty. thank you."
he shrugged and changed the subject. "big anniversary coming up for you next
year."
i nodded. next year would make me a thirty-year man. sixty per cent of my life
spent in shawshank state prison.
"think you'll ever get out?"
"sure. when i have a long white beard and just about three be marbles left
rolling around upstairs."
he smiled a little and then turned his face up into the sun again, his eyes
closed. "feels good."
"i think it always does when you know the damn winter's almost right on top of
you."
he nodded, and we were silent for awhile.
"when i get out of here," andy said finally, "i'm going where it's warm all the
time." he spoke with such calm assurance you would have thought he had only a
month or so left to serve. "you know where i'm goin, red?"
"nope. "
"zihuatanejo," he said, rolling the word softly from his tongue like music.
"down in mexico. it's a little place maybe twenty miles from playa azul and
mexico highway thirty-seven. it's a hundred miles northwest of acapulco on the
pacific ocean. you know what the mexicans say about the pacific?"
i told him i didn't.
"they say it has no memory. and that's where i want to finish out my life, red.
in a warm place that has no memory."
he had picked up a handful of pebbles as he spoke; now he tossed them, one by
one, and watched them bounce and roll across the baseball diamond's dirt
infield, which would be under a foot of snow before long.
"zihuatanejo. i'm going to have a little hotel down there. six cabanas along the
beach, and six more set further back, for the highway trade. 111 have a guy 
58
who'll take my guests out charter fishing. there'll be a trophy for the guy who
catches the biggest marlin of the season, and i'll put his picture up in the
lobby. it won't be a family place. it'll be a place for people on their
honeymoons first or second varieties."
"and where are you going to get the money to buy this fabulous place?" i asked
"your stock account?"
he looked at me and smiled. "that's not so far wrong," he said. "sometimes you
startle me, red."
"what are you talking about?"
"there are really only two types of men in the world when it comes to bad
trouble," andy said, cupping a match between his hands and lighting a cigarette.
"suppose there was a house full of rare paintings and sculptures and fine old
antiques, red? and suppose the guy who owned the house heard that there was a
monster of a hurricane headed right at it? one of those two kinds of men just
hopes for the best. the hurricane will change course, he says to himself. no
right-thinking hurricane would ever dare wipe out all these rembrandts, my two
degas horses, my grant woods, and my bentons. furthermore, god wouldn't allow
it. and if worse comes to worst, they're insured. that's one sort of man. the
other sort just assumes that hurricane is going to tear right through the middle
of his house. if the weather bureau says the hurricane just changed course, this
guy assumes it'll change back in order to put his house on ground-zero again.
this second type of guy knows there's no harm in hoping for the best as long as
you're prepared for the worst."
i lit a cigarette of my own. "are you saying you prepared for the eventuality? "
"yes. i prepared for the hurricane. i knew how bad it looked. i didn't have much
time, but in the time i had, i operated. i had a friend-just about the only
person who stood by me-who worked for an investment company in portland. he died
about six years ago. "
"sorry. "
“yeah.” andy tossed his butt away. "linda and i had about fourteen thousand
dollars. not a big bundle, but hell, we were young. we had our whole lives ahead
of us." he grimaced a little, then laughed. "when the shit hit the fan, i
started lugging my rembrandts out of the path of the hurricane. i sold my stocks
and paid the capital gains tax just like a good little boy. declared everything.
didn't cut any corners." 
59
"didn't they freeze your estate?"
"i was charged with murder, red, not dead! you can't freeze the assets of an
innocent man-thank god. and it was awhile before they even got brave enough to
charge me with the crime. jim-my friend-and i, we had some time. i got hit
pretty good, just dumping everything like that. got my nose skinned. but at the
time i had worse things to worry about than a small skinning on the stock
market."
"yeah, i'd say you did."
"but when i came to shawshank it was all safe. it's still safe. outside these
walls, red, there's a man that no living soul has ever seen face to face. he has
a social security card and a maine driver's license. he's got a birth
certificate. name of peter stevens. nice, anonymous name, huh?"
"who is he?" i asked. i thought i knew what he was going to say, but i couldn't
believe it.
"me. "
"you're not going to tell me that you had time to set up a false identity while
the bulls were sweating you," i said, "or that you finished the job while you
were on trial for-"
"no, i'm not going to tell you that. my friend jim was the one who set up the
false identity. he started after my appeal was turned down, and the major pieces
of identification were in his hands by the spring of 1950."
"he must have been a pretty close friend," i said. i was not sure how much of
this i believed a little, a lot, or none. but the day was warm and the sun was
out, and it was one hell of a good story. "all of that's one hundred per cent
illegal, setting up a false id like that. "
"he was a close friend," andy said. "we were in the war together. france,
germany, the occupation. he was a good friend.
he knew it was illegal, but he also knew that setting up a false identity in
this country is very easy and very safe. he took my money my money with all the
taxes on it paid so the irs wouldn't get too interested-and invested it for
peter stevens. he did that in 1950 and 1951. today it amounts to three hundred
and seventy thousand dollars, plus change."
i guess my jaw made a thump when it dropped against my chest, because he smiled. 
60
"think of all the things people wish they'd invested in since 1950 or so, and
two or three of them will be things peter stevens was into. if i hadn't ended up
in here, i'd probably be worth seven or eight million bucks by now. i'd have a
rolls . . . and probably an ulcer as big as a portable radio."
his hands went to the dirt and began sifting out more pebbles. they moved
gracefully, restlessly.
"it was hoping for the best and expecting the worst-nothing but that. the false
name was. just to keep what little capital i had untainted. it was lugging the
paintings out of the path of the hurricane. but i had no idea that the hurricane
. . . that it could go on as long as it has."
i didn't say anything for awhile. i guess i was trying to absorb the idea that
this small, spare man in prison gray next to me could be worth more money than
warden norton would make in the rest of his miserable life, even with the scams
thrown in.
"when you said you could get a lawyer, you sure weren't kidding," i said at
last. "for that kind of dough you could have hired clarence darrow, or whoever's
passing for him these days. why didn't you, andy? christ! you could have been
out of here like a rocket."
he smiled. it was the same smile that had been on his face when he'd told me he
and his wife had had their whole lives ahead of them "no," he said.
"a good lawyer would have sprung the williams kid from cashman whether he wanted
to go or not," i said. i was getting carried away now. "you could have gotten
your new trial, hired private detectives to look for that guy blatch, and blown
norton out of the water to boot. why not, andy?"
"because i outsmarted myself. if i ever try to put my hands on peter stevens's
money from inside here, i'll lose every cent of it. my friend jim could have
arranged it, but jim's dead. you see the problem? "
i saw it. for all the good that money could do andy, it might as well have
really belonged to another person. in a way, it did. and if the stuff it was
invested in suddenly turned bad, all andy could do would be to watch the plunge,
to trace it day after day on the stocks and-bonds page of the press-herald. it's
a tough life if you don't weaken, i guess.
"i'll tell you how it is, red. there's a big hayfield in the town of buxton. you
know where buxton is at, don't you?"
i said i did. it lies right next door to scarborough. 
61
"that's right. and at the north end of this particular hayfield there's a rock
wall, right out of a robert frost poem. and somewhere along the base of that
wall is a rock that has no business in a maine hayfield. it's a piece of
volcanic glass, and until 1947 it was a paperweight on my office desk. my friend
jim put it in that wall. there's a key underneath it. the key opens a safe
deposit box in the portland branch of the casco bank."
"i guess you're in a peck of trouble," i said. "when your friend jim died, the
irs must have opened all of his safe deposit boxes. along with the executor of
his will, of course."
andy smiled and tapped the side of my head. "not bad. there's more up there than
marshmallows, i guess. but we took care of the possibility that jim might die
while i was in the slam. the box is in the peter stevens name, and once a year
the firm of lawyers that served as jim's executors sends a check to the casco to
cover the rental of the stevens box.
"peter stevens is inside that box, just waiting to get out. his birth
certificate, his social security card, and his driver's license. the license is
six years out of date because jim died six years ago, true, but it's still
perfectly renewable for a five-dollar fee. his stock certificates are there, the
tax-free municipals, and about eighteen bearer bonds in the amount of ten
thousand dollars each."
i whistled.
"peter stevens is locked in a safe deposit box at the casco bank in portland and
andy dufresne is locked in a safe deposit box at shawshank," he said. "tit for
tat. and the key that unlocks the box and the money and the new life is under a
hunk of black glass in a buxton hayfield. told you this much, so i'll tell you
something else, red-for the last twenty years, give or take, i have been
watching the papers with a more than usual interest for news of any construction
projects in buxton. i keep thinking that someday soon i'm going to read that
they're putting a highway through there, or erecting a new community hospital,
or building a shopping center. burying my new life under ten feet of concrete,
or spitting it into a swamp somewhere with a big load of fill."
i blurted, "jesus christ, andy, if all of this is true, how do you keep from
going crazy?"
he smiled. "so far, all quiet on the western front."
"but it could be years-"
"it will be. but maybe not as many as the state and warden norton think it's
going to be. i just can't afford to wait that long. i keep thinking about 
62
zihuatanejo and that small hotel. that's all i want from my life now, red, and i
don't think that's too much to want. i didn't kill glenn quentin and i didn't
kill my wife, and that hotel . . . it's not too much to want. to swim and get a
tan and sleep in a room with open windows and space . . . that's not too much to
want."
he slung the stones away.
"you know, red," he said in an offhand voice, " a place like that . . . i'd have
to have a man who knows how to get things."
i thought about it for a long time. and the biggest drawback in my mind wasn't
even that we were talking pipedreams in a shitty little prison exercise yard
with armed guards looking down at us from their sentry posts. "i couldn't do
it," i said. "i couldn't get along on the outside. i'm what they call an
institutional man now. in here i'm the man who can get it for you, yeah. but out
there, anyone can get it for you. out there, if you want posters or rock hammers
or one particular record or a boat-in-a-bottle model kit, you can use the
fucking yellow pages. in here, i'm the fucking yellow pages. i wouldn't know how
to begin. or where."
"you underestimate yourself," he said. "you're a self-educated man, a self-made
man. a rather remarkable man, i think."
"hell, i don't even have a high school diploma."
"i know that," he said. "but it isn't just a piece of paper that makes a man.
and it isn't just prison that breaks one, either."
"i couldn't hack it outside, andy. i know that."

he got up. "you think it over," he said casually, just as the inside whistle
blew. and he strolled off, as if he were a free man who had just made another
free man a proposition. and for awhile just that was enough to make melees free.
andy could do that. he could make me forget for a time that we were both lifers,
at the mercy of a hard-ass parole board and a psalm-singing warden who liked
andy dufresne right where he was. after all, andy was a lap-dog who could do
tax-returns. what a wonderful animal! but by that night in my cell i felt like a
prisoner again. the whole idea seemed absurd, and that mental image of blue
water and white beaches seemed more cruel than foolish-it dragged at my brain
like a fishhook. i just couldn't wear that invisible coat the way andy did. i
fell asleep that night and dreamed of a great glassy black stone in the middle
of a hayfield; a stone shaped like a giant blacksmith's anvil. i was trying to
rock the stone up so i could get the key that was underneath. it wouldn't budge;
it was just too damned big. and in the background, but getting closer, i could 
63
hear the baying of bloodhounds.
 xii
which leads us, i guess, to the subject of jailbreaks. sure, they happen from
time to time in our happy little family. you don't go over the wall, though, not
at shawshank, not if you're smart. the searchlight beams go all night, probing
long white fingers across the open fields that surround the prison on three
sides and the stinking marshland on the fourth. cons do go over the wall from
time to time, and the searchlights almost always catch them. if not, they get
picked up trying to thumb a ride on highway 6 or highway 99. if they try to cut
across country, some farmer sees them and just phones the location in to the
prison. cons who go over the wall are stupid cons. shawshank is no canon city,
but in a rural area a man humping his ass across country in a gray pajama suit
sticks out like a cockroach on a wedding cake.
over the years, the guys who have done the best-maybe oddly, maybe not so
oddly-are the guys who did it on the spur of the moment. some of them have gone
out in the middle of a cartful of sheets; a convict sandwich on white, you could
say. there was a lot of that when i first came in here, but over the years they
have more or less closed that loophole.
warden norton's famous "inside-out" program produced its share of escapees, too.
they were the guys who decided they liked what lay to the right of the hyphen
better than what lay to the left. and again, in most cases it was a very casual
kind of thing. drop your blueberry rake and stroll into the bushes while one of
the screws is having a glass of water at the truck or when a couple o~ them get
too involved in arguing over yards passing or rushing or the old boston
patriots.
in 1969, the inside-outers were picking potatoes in sabbatus. it was the third
of november and the work was almost done. there was a guard named henry
pugh - and he is no longer a member o our happy little family, believe me –
sitting on the back bumper of one of the potato trucks and having his lunch with
his carbine across his knees when a beautiful (or so it was told to me, but
sometimes these things get exaggerated) ten-point buck strolled out of the cold
early afternoon mist. pugh went after it with visions of just how that trophy
would look mounted in his rec room, and while he was doing it, three of his
charges just walked away. two were recaptured in a lisbon falls pinball parlor. 
64
the third has not beer found to this day.
i suppose the most famous case of all was that of sid nedeau. this goes back to
1958, and i guess it will never be topped. sid was out lining the ball field for
a saturday intramural baseball game when the three o'clock inside whistle blew,
signaling the shift change for the guards. the parking lot is just beyond the
exercise yard, on the other side of the electrically operated main gate. at
three the gate opens and the guards coming on duty and those going off mingle.
there's a lot of back-slapping and bullyragging, comparison of league bowling
scores and the usual number of tired old ethnic jokes.
sid just trundled his lining machine right out through the gate, leaving a
three-inch baseline all the way from home plate in the exercise yard to the
ditch on the far side of route 6, where they found the machine overturned in a
pile of lime. don't ask me how he did it. he was dressed in his prison uniform,
he stood six-feet-two, and he was billowing clouds of lime-dust behind him all i
can figure is that, it being friday afternoon and all, the guards going off were
so happy to be going off, and the guards coming on were so downhearted to be
coming on, that the members of the former group never got their heads out of the
clouds and those in the latter never got their noses off their shoe tops . . .
and old sid nedeau just sort of slipped out between the two.
so far as i know, sid is still at large. over the years, andy dufresne and i had
a good many laughs over sid nedeau's great escape, and when we heard about that
airline hijacking for ransom, the one where the guy parachuted from the back
door of the airplane, andy swore up and down that d. b. cooper's real name was
sid nedeau.
"and he probably had a pocketful of baseline lime in his pocket for good luck,"
andy said. "that lucky son of a bitch."
but you should understand that a case like sid nedeau, or the fellow who got
away clean from the sabbatus potato-field crew, guys like that are winning the
prison version of the irish sweepstakes. purely a case of six different kinds of
luck somehow jelling together all at the same moment. a stiff like andy could
wait ninety years and not get a similar break.
maybe you remember, a ways back, i mentioned a guy named henley backus, the
washroom foreman in the laundry. he came to shawshank in 1922 and died in the
prison infirmary thirty-one years later. escapes and escape attempts were a
hobby of his, maybe because he never quite dared to take the plunge himself. he
could tell you a hundred different schemes, all of them crackpot, and all of
them had been tried in the shank at one time or another. my favorite was the
tale of beaver morrison, a b&e convict who tried to build a glider from scratch
in the plate-factory basement. the plans he was working from were in a 
65
circa-1900 book called the modern boy's guide to fan and adventure. beaver got
it built without being discovered, or so the story goes, only to discover there
was no door from the basement big enough to get the damned thing out. when
henley told that story, you could bust a gut laughing, and he knew a dozen-no,
two dozen-almost as funny.
when it came to detailing shawshank bust-outs, henley had it down chapter and
verse. he told me once that during his time there had been better than four
hundred escape attempts that he knew of. really think about that for a moment
before you just nod your head and read on four hundred escape attempts! that
comes out to 12.9 escape attempts for every year henley backus was in shawshank
and keeping track of them. the escape-attempt-of-the-month club. of course most
of them were pretty slipshod affairs, the sort of thing that ends up with a
guard grabbing some poor, sidling slob's arm and growling, "where do you think
you're going, you happy asshole?"
henley said he'd class maybe sixty of them as more serious attempts, and he
included the "prison break" of 1937, the year before i arrived at the shank. the
new administration wing was under construction then and fourteen cons got out,
using construction equipment in a poorly locked shed. the whole of southern
maine got into a panic over those fourteen "hardened criminals," most of whom
were scared to death and had no more idea of where they should go than a
jackrabbit does when it's headlight-pinned to the highway with a big truck
bearing down on it. not one of those fourteen got away. two of them were shot
dead-by civilians, not police officers or prison personnel-but none got away.
how many had gotten away between 1938, when i came here, and that day in october
when andy first mentioned zihuatanejo to me? putting my information and henley's
together, i'd say ten. ten that got away clean. and although it isn't the kind
of thing you can know for sure, i'd guess that at least half of those ten are
doing time in other institutions of lower learning like the shank. because you
do get institutionalized. when you take away a man's freedom and teach him to
live in a cell, he seems to lose his ability to think in dimensions he's like
that jackrabbit i mentioned, frozen in the oncoming lights of the truck that is
bound to kill it. more often than not a con who's just out will pull some dumb
job that hasn't a chance in hell of succeeding . . . and why? because it'll get
him back inside. back where he understands how things work.
andy wasn't that way, but i was. the idea of seeing the pacific sounded good,
but i was afraid that actually being there would scare me to death-the bigness
of it.
anyhow, the day of that conversation about mexico, and about mr. peter stevens .
. . that was the day i began to believe that andy had some idea of doing a
disappearing act. i hoped to god he would be careful if he did, and still, i
wouldn't have bet money on his chances of succeeding. warden norton, you see, 
66
was watching andy with a special close eye. andy wasn't just another deadhead
with a number to norton; they had a working relationship, you might say. also,
andy had brains and he had heart. norton was determined to use the one and crush
the other.
as there are honest politicians on the outside-ones who stay bought-there are
honest prison guards, and if you are a good judge of character and if you have
some loot to spread around, i suppose it's possible that you could buy enough
look-the-other-way to make a break. i'm not the man to tell you such a thing has
never been done, but andy dufresne wasn't the man who could do it. because, as
i've said, norton was watching. andy knew it, and the screws knew it, too.
nobody was going to nominate andy for the inside-out program, not as long as
warden norton was evaluating the nominations. and andy was not the kind of man
to try a casual sid nedeau type of escape.
if i had been him, the thought of that key would have tormented me endlessly. i
would have been lucky to get two hours' worth of honest shut-eye a night. buxton
was less than thirty miles from shawshank. so near and yet so far.
i still thought his best chance was to engage a lawyer and try for the retrial.
anything to get out from under norton's thumb. maybe tommy williams could be
shut up by nothing more than a cushy furlough program, but i wasn't entirely
sure. maybe a good old mississippi hard-ass lawyer could crack him . . . and
maybe that lawyer wouldn't even have to work that hard. williams had honestly
liked andy. every now and then i'd bring these points up to andy, who would only
smile, his eyes far away, and say he was thinking about it.
apparently he'd been thinking about a lot of other things, as well.
in 1975, andy dufresne escaped from shawshank. he hasn't been recaptured, and i
don't think he ever will be. in fact, i don't think andy dufresne even exists
anymore. but i think there's a man down in zihuatanejo, mexico, named peter
stevens. probably running a very new small hotel in this year of our lord 1976.
i'll tell you what i know and what i think; that's about all i can do, isn't it?
on march 12th, 1975, the cell doors in cellblock 5 opened at 6:30 a.m., as they
do every morning around here except sunday. and as they do every day except
sunday, the inmates of those cells stepped forward into the corridor and formed
two lines as the cell doors slammed shut behind them. they walked up to the main
cellblock gate, where they were counted off by two guards before being sent on
down to the cafeteria for a breakfast of oatmeal, scrambled eggs, and fatty
bacon. 
67
all of this went according to routine until the count at the cellblock gate.
there should have been twenty-seven. instead, there were twenty-six. after a
call to the captain of the guards, cellblock 5 was allowed to go to breakfast.
the captain of the guards, a not half-bad fellow named richard gonyar, and his
assistant, a jolly prick named dave burkes, came down to cellblock 5 right away.
gonyar re-opened the cell doors and he and burkes went down the corridor
together, dragging their sticks over the bars, their guns out. in a case like
that what you usually have is someone who has been taken sick in the night, so
sick he can't even step out of his cell in the morning. more rarely, someone has
died . . . or committed suicide.
but this time, they found a mystery instead of a sick man or a dead man. they
found no man at all. there were fourteen cells in cellblock 5, seven to a side,
all fairly neat-restriction of visiting privileges is the penalty for a sloppy
cell at shawshank-and all very empty.
gonyar's first assumption was that there had been a miscount or a practical
joke. so instead of going off to work after breakfast, the inmates of cellblock
5 were sent back to their cells, joking and happy. any break in the routine was
always welcome.
cell doors opened; prisoners stepped in; cell doors closed. some clown shouting,
"i want my lawyer, i want my lawyer, you guys run this place just like a
frigging prison." burkes: "shut up in there, or i'll rank you." the clown: "i
ranked your wife, burkie." gonyar: "shut up, all of you, or you'll spend the day
in there."
he and burkes went up the line again, counting noses. they didn't have to go
far.
"who belongs in this cell?" gonyar asked the rightside night guard.
"andrew dufresne," the rightside answered, and that was all it took. everything
stopped being routine right then. the balloon went up.
in all the prison movies i've seen, this wailing horn goes off when there's been
a break. that never happens at shawshank. the first thing gonyar did was to get
in touch with the warden. the second thing was to get a search of the prison
going. the third was to alert the state police in scarborough to the possibility
of a breakout.
that was the routine. it didn't call for them to search the suspected escapee's
cell, and so no one did. not then. why would they? it was a case of what you see
is what you get. it was a small square room, bars on the window and bars on the
sliding door. rocks on the windowsill . 
68
and the poster, of course. it was linda ronstadt by then. the poster was right
over his bunk. there had been a poster there, in that exact same place, for
twenty-six years. and when someone, who was warden norton himself, as it turned
out, poetic justice if there ever was anybody looked behind it, they got one
hell of a shock.
but that didn't happen until six-thirty that night, almost twelve hours after
andy had been reported missing, probably twenty hours after he had actually made
his escape.
norton hit the roof.
i have it on good authority. chester, the trusty, who was waxing the hall floor
in the admin wing that day. he didn't have to polish any keyplates with his ear
that day; he said you could hear the warden clear down to records & files as he
chewed on rich gonyar's ass.
"what do you mean, you're 'satisfied he's not on the prison grounds'? what does
that mean? it means you didn't find him! you better find him! you better!
because i want him! do you hear me? want him!" gonyar said something.
"didn't happen on your shift? that's what you say. so far as i can tell, no one
knows when it happened. or how. or if it really did. now, i want him in my
office by three o'clock this afternoon, or some heads are going to roll. i can
promise you that, and i always keep my promises."
something else from gonyar, something that seemed to provoke norton to even
greater rage.
"no? then look at this! look at this.' you recognize it? last night's tally for
cellblock five. every prisoner accounted for! dufresne was locked up last night
at nine and it is impossible for him to be gone now! it is impossible! now you
and him!"
but at three that afternoon andy was still among the missing. norton himself
stormed down to cellblock 5 a few hours later, where the rest of us had been
locked up all of that day. had we been questioned? we had spent most of that
long day being questioned by harried screws who were feeling the breath of the
dragon on the backs of their necks. we all said the same thing: we had seen
nothing, heard nothing. and so far as i know, we were all telling the truth. i
know that i was. all we could say was that andy had indeed been in his cell at
the time of the lock-in, and at lights-out an hour later.
one wit suggested that andy had poured himself out through the keyhole. the
suggestion earned the guy four days in solitary they were uptight. so norton came down. 
69
he stalked down glaring at us with blue eyes nearly hot enough to strike sparks from the
tempered steel bar of our cages. he looked at us as if he believed we were all in on it
probably he did believe it.
he went into andy's cell and looked around. it was just as andy had left it, the
sheets on his bunk turned back but without looking slept-in. rocks on the
windowsill . . . but not all of them. the ones he liked best he took with him.
"rocks," norton hissed, and swept them off the window ledge with a clatter.
gonyar, who was now on overtime, winced but said nothing .
norton's eyes fell on the linda ronstadt poster. linda was looking back over her
shoulder, her hands tucked into the back pockets of a very tight pair of
fawn-colored slacks. she was wearing a halter and she had a deep california tan.
it must have offended the hell out of norton's baptist sensibilities, that
poster.
watching him glare at it, i remembered what andy had once said about feeling he
could almost step through the picture and be with the girl.
in a very real way, that was exactly what he did, as norton was only seconds
from discovering.
"wretched thing!" he grunted, and ripped the poster from the wall with a single
swipe of his hand. and revealed the gaping, crumbled hole in the concrete behind
it .
gonyar wouldn't go in.
norton ordered him. god, they must have heard norton ordering rich gonyar to go
in there all over the prison, and gonyar just refused him, point blank.
"i'll have your job for this!" norton screamed. he was as hysterical as a woman
having a hot-flash. he had utterly blown his cool. his neck had turned a rich,
dark red, and two veins stood out, throbbing, on his forehead. "you can count on
it, you . . . you frenchman! i'll have your job and i'll see to it that you
never get another one in any prison system in new england!"
gonyar silently held out his service pistol to norton, butt first. he'd had enough. he was
then two hours overtime, going on three, and he'd just had enough. it was as if andy's
defection from our happy little family had driven norton right over the edge of some
private irrationality that had been there for a long time. . .
i don't know what that private irrationality might have been, of course. but i
do know that there were twenty-six cons listening to norton s little dust-up 
70
with rich gonyar that evening as the last of the light faded from a dull
late-winter sky, all of us hard-timers and long-line riders who had seen the
administrators come and go, the hard-asses and the candy-asses alike, and we all
knew that warden samuel norton had just passed what the engineers like to call
"the breaking strain."
and by god, it almost seemed to me that somewhere i could hear andy dufresne
laughing.
norton finally got a skinny drink of water on the night shift to go into the
hole that had been behind andy's poster of linda ronstadt. the skinny guard's
name was rory tremont, and he was not exactly a ball of fire in the brains
department. maybe he thought he was going to win a bronze star or something. as
it turned out, it was fortunate that norton got someone of andy's approximate
height and build to go in there; if they had sent a big-assed fellow, as most
prison guards seem to be, the guy would have stuck in there as sure as god made
green grass . . . and he might be there still.
tremont went in with a nylon filament rope, which someone had found in the trunk
of his car, tied around his waist and a big six-battery flashlight in one hand.
by then gonyar, who had changed his mind about quitting and who seemed to be the
only one there still able to think clearly, had dug out a set of blueprints.
i knew well enough what they showed him, a wall which looked, in cross-section,
like a sandwich. the entire wall was ten feet thick. the inner and outer
sections were each about four feet thick. in the center was two feet of
pipe-space, and you want to believe that was the meat of the thing . . . in more
ways than one.
tremont's voice came out of the hole, sounding hollow and dead. "something
smells awful in here, warden."
"never mind that! keep going."
tremont's lower legs disappeared into the hole. a moment later his feet were
gone, too. his light flashed dimly back and forth.
"warden, it smells pretty damn bad."
"never mind, i said!" norton cried.
dolorously, tremont's voice floated back: "smells like shit. oh god, that's what
it is, it's shit, oh my god lemme outta here i'm gonna blow my groceries oh shit
it's shit oh my gawwwwwd!" and then came the unmistakable sound of rory tremont
losing his last couple of meals. 
71
well, that was it for me. i couldn't help myself. the whole day, hell no, the
last thirty years, all came up on me at once and i started laughing fit to
split, a laugh such as i'd never had since i was a free man, the kind of laugh i
never expected to have inside these gray walls. and oh dear god didn't it feel
good!
"get that man out of here!" warden norton was screaming, and i was laughing so
hard i didn't know if he meant me or tremont. i just went on laughing and
kicking my feet and holding onto my belly. i couldn't have stopped if norton had
threatened to shoot me dead-bang on the spot. "get him out!"
well, friends and neighbors, i was the one who went. straight down to solitary,
and there i stayed for fifteen days. a long shot. but every now and then i'd
think about poor old not-too-bright rory tremont bellowing oh shit it's shit,
and then i'd think about andy dufresne heading south in his own car, dressed in
a nice suit, and i'd just have to laugh. i did that fifteen days in solitary
practically standing on my head. maybe because half of me was with andy
dufresne, andy dufresne who had waded in shit and came out clean on the other
side, andy dufresne, headed for the pacific.
i heard the rest of what went on that night from half a dozen sources. there
wasn't all that much, anyway. i guess that rory tremont decided he didn't have
much left to lose after he'd lost his lunch and dinner, because he did go on.
there was no danger of falling down the pipe-shaft between the inner and outer
segments of the cellblock wall; it was so narrow that tremont actually had to
wedge himself down. he said later that he could only take half-breaths and that
he knew what it would be like to be buried alive.
what he found at the bottom of the shaft was a master sewer-pipe which served
the fourteen toilets in cellblock 5, a porcelain pipe that had been laid
thirty-three years before. it had been broken into. beside the jagged hole in
the pipe, tremont found andy's rock-hammer.
andy had gotten free, but it hadn't been easy.
the pipe was even narrower than the shaft tremont had just descended. rory
tremont didn't go in, and so far as i know, no one else did, either. it must
have been damn near unspeakable. a rat jumped out of the pipe as tremont was
examining the hole and the rock-hammer, and he swore later that it was nearly as
big as a cocker spaniel pup. he went back up the crawlspace to andy's cell like
a monkey on a stick.
andy had gone into that pipe. maybe he knew that it emptied into a stream five
hundred yards beyond the prison on the marshy western side. i think he did. the 
72
prison blueprints were around, and andy would have found a way to look at them.
he was a methodical cuss. he would have known or found out that the sewer-pipe
running out of cellblock 5 was the last one in shawshank not hooked into the new
waste-treatment plant, and he would have known it was do it by mid- 197 5 or do
it never, because in august they were going to switch us over to the new waste treatment
plant, too. five hundred yards. the length of five football fields. just shy of half a mile. he
crawled that distance, maybe with one of those small pen lights in his hand, maybe with
nothing but a couple of books of matches. he crawled through foulness that i either can't
imagine or don't want to imagine. maybe the rats scattered in front of him, or maybe they
went for him the way such animals sometimes will when they've had a chance to grow
bold in the dark. he must have had just enough clearance at the shoulders to keep
moving, and he probably had to shove himself through the places where the lengths of
pipe were joined. if it had been me, the claustrophobia would have driven me mad a dozen
times over. but he did it.
at the far end of the pipe they found a set of muddy footprints leading out of
the sluggish, polluted creek the pipe fed into. two miles from there a search
party found his prison uniform. that was a day later.
three months after that memorable day, warden norton resigned. he was a broken
man, it gives me great pleasure to report. the spring was gone from his step. on
his last day he shuffled act with his head down like an old con shuffling down
to the infirmary for his codeine pills. it was gonyar who took over, and to
norton that must have seemed like the unkindest cut of all. for all i knee, sam
norton is down there in eliot now, attending services at the baptist church
every sunday, and wondering how the hell andy dufresne ever could have gotten
the better of him.
i could have told him; the answer to the question is simplicity itself. some
have got it, sam. and some don't, and never will.
 
73
xiii
that's what i know; now i'm going to tell you what i think i may have it wrong
on some of the specifics, but i'd be willing to let my watch and chain that i've
got the general outline down pretty well. because, with andy being the sort of
man that he was, there's only one or two ways that it could have been. and every
now ad then, when i think it out, i think of normaden, that half-crazy indian.
"nice della," normaden had said after celling with andy for eight months. "i was
glad to go, me. bad draft in that cell. all the time cold. he don't let nobody
touch his things. that's okay. nice man, never made fun. but big draft."
poor crazy normaden. be knew more than all the rest of us, and he knew it sooner. and
it was eight long months before andy could get him out of there and have the
cell to himself again. if it hadn't been for the eight months normaden had spent
with him after warden norton first came in. i do believe that andy would have
been free before nixon resigned.
i believe now that it began in 1949, way back then - not with the rock-hammer, but
with the rita hayworth poster. i told you how nervous he seemed when he asked
for that, nervous and filled with suppressed excitement. at the time i thought
it was just embarrassment, that andy was the sort of guy who'd never want
someone else to know that he had feet of clay and wanted a woman . . .
especially if it was a fantasy-woman. but i think now that i was wrong. i think
now that andy's excitement came from something else altogether.
what was responsible for the hole that warden norton eventually found behind the
poster of a girl that hadn't even been born when that photo of rita hayworth was
taken? andy dufresne's perseverance and hard work, yeah - i don't take any of that 
74
away from him. but there were two other elements in the equation: a lot of luck,
and wpa concrete.
you don't need me to explain the luck, i guess. the wpa concrete i checked out
for myself. i invested some time and a couple of stamps and wrote first to the
university of maine history department and then to a fellow whose address they
were able to give me. this fellow had been foreman of the wpa project that built
the shawshank max security wing.
the wing, which contains cellblocks 3, 4, and 5, was built in the years 1934-37.
now, most people don't think of cement and concrete as "technological
developments," the way we think of cars and oil furnaces and rocket-ships, but
they really are. there was no modern cement until 1870 or so, and no modern
concrete until after the turn of the century. mixing concrete is as delicate a
business as making bread. you can get it too watery or not watery enough. you
can get the sand-mix too thick or too thin, and the same is true of the
gravel-mix. and back in 1934, the science of mixing the stuff was a lot less
sophisticated than it is today.
the walls of cellblock 5 were solid enough, but they weren't exactly dry and
toasty. as a matter or fact, they were and are pretty damned dank. after a long
wet spell they would sweat and sometimes even drip. cracks had a way of
appearing, some an inch deep. they were routinely mortared over.
now here comes andy dufresne into cellblock 5. he's a man who graduated from the
university of maine's school of business, but he's also a man who took two or
three geology courses along the e way. geology had, in fact, become his chief
hobby. i imagine it appealed to his patient, meticulous nature. a
ten-thousand-year ice age here. a million years of mountain-building there.
plates of bedrock grinding against each other deep under the earth's skin over
the millennia. pressure. andy told me once that all of geology is the study of
pressure.
and time, of course. he had time to study those walls. plenty of time. when the cell door
slams and the lights go out, there's nothing else to look at.
first-timers usually have a hard time adjusting to the confinement of prison
life. they get screw-fever. sometimes they have to be hauled down to the
infirmary and sedated a couple of times before they get on the beam. it's not
unusual to hear some new member of our happy little family banging on the bars
of his cell and screaming to be let out . . . and before the cries have gone on
for long, the chant starts up along the cellblock: "fresh fish, hey little
fishie, fresh fish, fresh fish, got fresh fish today!"
andy didn't flip out like that when he came to the shank in 1948, but that's not 
75
to say that he didn't feel many of the same things. he may have come close to
madness; some do, and some go sailing right over the edge. old life blown away
in the wink of an eye, indeterminate nightmare stretching out ahead, a long
season in hell.
so what did he do, i ask you? he searched almost desperately for something to
divert his restless mind. oh, there are all sorts of ways to divert yourself,
even in prison; it seems like the human mind is full of an infinite number of
possibilities when it comes to diversion. i told you about the sculptor and his
three ages of jesus. there were coin collectors who were always losing their
collections to thieves, stamp collectors, one fellow who had postcards from
thirty-five different countries-and let me tell you, he would have turned out
your lights if he'd caught you diddling with his postcards.
andy got interested in rocks. and the walls of his cell.
i think that his initial intention might have been to do no more than to carve
his initials into the wall where the poster of rita hayworth would soon be
hanging. his initials, or maybe a few lines from some poem. instead, what he
found was that interestingly weak concrete. maybe he started to carve his
initials and a big chunk of the wall just fell out. i can see him, lying there
on his bunk, looking at that broken chunk of concrete, turning it over in his
hands. never mind the wreck of your whole life, never mind that you got
railroaded into this place by a whole trainload of bad luck. let's forget all
that and look at this piece of concrete.
some months further along he might have decided it would be fun to see how much
of that wall he could take out. but you can't just start digging into your wall
and then, when the weekly inspection (or one of the surprise inspections that
are always turning up interesting caches of booze, drugs, dirty pictures, and
weapons) comes around, say to the guard: "this? just excavating a little hole in
my cell wall. not to worry, my good man."
no, he couldn't have that. so he came to me and asked if i could get him a rita
hayworth poster. not a little one but a big one.
and, of course, he had the rock-hammer. i remember thinking when i got him that
gadget back in '48 that it would take a man six hundred years to burrow through
the wall with it. true enough. but andy only had to go through half the wall-and
even with the soft concrete, it took him two rock-hammers and twenty-seven years
to do it.
of course he lost most of one of those years to normaden, and he could only work
at night, preferably late at night, when almost everybody is asleep-including
the guards who work the night shift. but i suspect the thing which slowed him 
76
down the most was getting rid of the wall as he took it out. he could muffle the
sound of his work by wrapping the head of his hammer in rock-polishing cloths,
but what to do with the pulverized concrete and the occasional chunks that came
out whole?
i think he must have broken up the chunks into pebbles and . . .
i remembered the sunday after i had gotten him the rockhammer. i remember
watching him walk across the exercise yard, his face puffy from his latest
go-round with the sisters. i saw him stoop, pick up a pebble . . . and it
disappeared up his sleeve. that inside sleeve-pocket is an old prison trick. up
your sleeve or just inside the cuff of your pants. and i have another memory,
very strong but unfocused, maybe something i saw more than once. this memory is
of andy dufresne walking across the exercise yard on a hot summer day when the
air was utterly still. still, yeah . . . except for the little breeze that
seemed to be blowing sand around andy dufresne's feet. so maybe he had a couple
of cheaters in his pants below the knees. you loaded the cheaters up with fill
and then just strolled around, your hands in your pockets, and when you felt
safe and unobserved, you gave the pockets a little twitch. the pockets, of
course, are attached by string or strong thread to the cheaters. the fill goes
cascading out of your pants legs as you walk. the world war ii pows who were
trying to tunnel out used the dodge.
the years went past and andy brought his wall out to the exercise yard cupful by
cupful. he played the game with administrator after administrator, and they
thought it was because he wanted to keep the library growing. i have no doubt
that was part of it, but the main thing andy wanted was to keep cell 14 in
cellblock 5 a single occupancy.
i doubt if he had any real plans or hopes of breaking out, at least not at
first. he probably assumed the wall was ten feet of solid concrete, and that if
he succeeded in boring all the way through it, he'd come out thirty feet over
the exercise yard. but like i say, i don't think he was worried overmuch about
breaking through. his assumption could have run this way: i m only making a foot
of progress every seven years or so; therefore, it would take me seventy years
to break through; that would make me one hundred and one years old.
here's a second assumption i would have made, had i been andy: that eventually i
would be caught and get a lot of solitary time, not to mention a very large
black mark on my record. after all, there was the regular weekly inspection and
a surprise toss-which usually came at night-every second week or so. he must
have decided that things couldn't go on for long. sooner or later, some screw
was going to peek behind rita hayworth just to make sure andy didn't have a
sharpened spoon-handle or some marijuana reefers scotch-taped to the wall. 
77
and his response to that second assumption must have been to hell with it. maybe
he even made a game out of it. how far in can i get before they find out? prison
is a goddam boring place, and the chance of being surprised by an unscheduled
inspection in the middle of the night while he had his poster unstuck probably
added some spice to his life during the early years.
and i do believe it would have been impossible for him to get away with it just
on dumb luck. not for twenty-seven years. nevertheless, i have to believe that
for the first two years- until mid-may of 1950, when he helped byron hadley get
around the tax on his windfall inheritance-that's exactly what he did get by on.
or maybe he had something more than dumb luck going for him even back then. he
had money, and he might have been slipping someone a little squeeze every week
to take it easy on him. most guards will go along with that if the price is
right; it's money in their pockets and the prisoner gets to keep his whack off
pictures or his tailor made cigarettes. also, andy was a model prisoner- quiet,
well-spoken, respectful, non-violent. it's the crazies and the stampeders that
get their cells turned upside-down at least once every six months, their
mattresses unzipped, their pillows taken away and cut open, the outflow pipe
from their toilets carefully probed.
then, in 1950, andy became something more than a model prisoner. in 1950, he
became a valuable commodity, a murderer who did tax-returns better than h&r
block. he gave gratis estate-planning advice, set up tax-shelters, filled out
loan applications (sometimes creatively). i can remember him sitting behind his
desk in the library, patiently going over a car-loan agreement paragraph by
paragraph with a screwhead who wanted to buy a used desoto, telling the guy what
was good about the agreement and what was bad about it, explaining to him that
it was possible to shop for a loan and not get hit quite so bad, steering him
away from the finance companies, which in those days were sometimes little it
better than legal loan sharks. when he d finished, the screwhead started to put
out his hand . . . and then drew it back to himself quickly. he d forgotten for
a moment, you see, that he was dealing with a mascot, not a man.
andy kept up on the tax laws and the changes in the stock markets and so his
usefulness didn't end after he d been in cold storage for awhile, as it might
have done. he began to get his library money, his running war with the sisters
had ended, and nobody tossed his cell very hard. he was a good nigger.
then one day, very late in the going-perhaps around october of 1967-the
long-time hobby suddenly turned into something else. one night while was in the
hole up to his waist with raquel welch hanging down over his ass, the pick end of
his rock-hammer must have suddenly sunk into concrete past the hilt.
he would have dragged some chunks of concrete back, but maybe he heard other
falling down into that shaft, bouncing back and forth, clinking of that 
78
standpipe. did he know by then that he was going to come upon that shaft, or was
he totally surprised? i don't know. he might have seen the prison blueprints by
then or he might not have. if not, you can be damned sure he found a way to look
at them not long after.
all at once he must have realized that, instead of just playing a game, he was
playing for high stakes . . . in terms of his own life and his own future, tie
highest. even then he couldn't have known for sure, but he muss have had a
pretty good idea because it was right around then that he talked to me about
zihuatanejo for the first time. all of a sudden, instead of just being a toy,
that stupid hole in the wall became his master-if he knew about the sewer-pipe
at the bottom and that it led under the outer wall, it did, anyway.
he'd had the key under the rock in buxton to worry about for years. now he had d
worry that some eager-beaver new guard would look behind his poster and expose
the whole thing, or that he would get another cellmate, or that he would, after
all those years, suddenly be transferred he had all those things on his mind for
the next eight years. all scan say is that he must have been one of the coolest
men who ever lived. i would have gone completely nuts after awhile, living with
al that uncertainty. but andy just went on playing the game.
he had to carry tie possibility of discovery for another eight years-the
probability )f it, you might say, because no matter how carefully he stacked tie
cards in his favor, as an inmate of a state prison, he just didn't have that
many to stack . . . and the gods had been kind to him for a very long time; some
nineteen years.
the most ghastly irony i can think of would have been if he had been offered a
parole. can you imagine it? three days before the parolee is actually released,
he is transferred into the light security wing to undergo a complete physical
and a battery of vocational tests. while he's there, his old cell is completely
cleaned out. instead of getting his parole, andy would have gotten a long turn
downstairs in solitary, followed by some more time upstairs . . . but in a
different cell.
if he broke into the shaft in 1967, how come he didn't escape until 1975 ? i
don't know for sure-but i can advance some pretty good guesses.
first, he would have become more careful than ever. he was too smart to just
push ahead at flank speed and try to get out in eight months, or even in
eighteen. he must have gone on widening the opening on the crawlspace a little
at a time. a hole as big as a teacup by the time he took his new year's eve
drink that year. a hole as big as a dinner-plate by the time he took his
birthday drink in 1968. as big as a serving-tray by the time the 1969 baseball
season opened. 
79
for a time i thought it should have gone much faster than it apparently
did-after he broke through, i mean. it seemed to me that, instead of hating to
pulverize the crap and take it out of his cell in the cheater gadgets i have
described, he could simply let it drop down the shaft. the length of time he
took makes me believe that he didn't dare do that. he might have decided that
the noise would arouse someone's suspicions. or, if he knew about the
sewer-pipe, as i believe he must have, he would have been afraid that a falling
chunk of concrete would break it before he was ready, screwing up the cellblock
sewage system and leading to an investigation. and an investigation, needless to
say, would lead to ruin.
still and all, i'd guess that, by the time nixon was sworn in for his second
term, the hole would have been wide enough for him to wriggle through . . . and
probably sooner than that. andy was a small guy.
why didn't he go then?
that's where my educated guesses run out, folks; from this point they become
progressively wilder. one possibility is that the crawlspace itself was clogged
with crap and he had to clear it out. but that wouldn't account for all the
time. so what was it?
i think that maybe andy got scared.
i've told you as well as i can how it is to be an institutional man. at first
you can't stand those four walls, then you get so you can abide them, then you
get so you accept them . . . and then, as your body and your mind and your
spirit adjust to life on an ho scale, you get to love them. you are told when to
eat, when you can write letters, when you can smoke. if you're at work in the
laundry or the plate-shop, you're assigned five minutes of each hour when you
can go to the bathroom. for thirty-five years, my time was twenty-five minutes
after the hour, and after thirty-five years, that's the only time i ever felt
the need to take a piss or have a crap: twenty-five minutes past the hour. and
if for some reason i couldn't go, the need would pass at thirty after, and come
back at twenty-five past the next hour.
i think andy may have been wrestling with that tiger-that institutional
syndrome-and also with the bulking fears that all of it might have been for
nothing.
how many nights must he have lain awake under his poster, thinking about that
sewer line, knowing that the one chance was all he'd ever get? the blueprints
might have told him how big the pipe's bore was, but a blueprint couldn't tell
him what it would be like inside that pipe-if he would be able to breathe
without choking, if the rats were big enough and mean enough to fight instead of 
80
retreating . . . and a blueprint couldn't've told him what he'd find at the end
of the pipe, when and if he got there. here's a joke even funnier than the
parole would have been: andy breaks into the sewer line, crawls through five
hundred yards of choking, shit-smelling darkness, and comes up against a
heavy-gauge mesh screen at the end of it all. ha, ha, very funny.
that would have been on his mind. and if the long shot actually came in and he
was able to get out, would he be able to get some civilian clothes and get away
from the vicinity of the prison undetected? last of all, suppose he got out of
the pipe, got away from shawshank before the alarm was raised, got to buxton,
overturned the right rock. . . and found nothing beneath? not necessarily
something so dramatic as arriving at the right field and discovering that a
highrise apartment building had been erected on the spot, or that it had been
turned into a supermarket parking lot.
it could have been that some little kid who liked rocks noticed that piece of
volcanic glass, turned it over, saw the deposit-box key, and took both it and
the rock back to his room as souvenirs. maybe a november hunter kicked the rock,
left the key exposed, and a squirrel or a crow with a liking for bright shiny
things had taken it away. maybe there had been spring floods one year, breaching
the wall, washing the key away. maybe anything.
so i think-wild guess or not-that andy just froze in place for awhile. after
all, you can't lose if you don't bet. what did he have to lose, you ask? his
library, for one thing. the poison peace of institutional life, for another. any
future chance to grab his safe identity.
but he finally did it, just as i have told you. he tried . . . and, my! didn't
he succeed in spectacular fashion? you tell me!
but did he get away, you ask? what happened after? what happened when he got to
that meadow and turned over that rock . . . always assuming the rock was still
there? i can't describe that scene for you, because this institutional man is
still in this institution, and expects to be for years to come. but i'll tell
you this. very late in the summer of 1975, on september 15th, to be exact, i got
a postcard which had been mailed from the tiny town of mcnary, texas. that town
is on the american side of the border, directly across from el porvenir. the
message side of the card was totally blank. but i know. i know it in my heart as
surely as i know that we're all going to die someday.
mcnary was where he crossed. mcnary, texas.
so that's my story, jack. i never believed how long it would take to write it
all down, or how many pages it would take. i started writing just after i got
that postcard, and here i am finishing up on january 14th, 1976. i've used three
pencils right down to knuckle-stubs, and a whole tablet of paper. i've kept the 
81
pages carefully hidden. . . not that many could read my hen-tracks, anyway.
it stirred up more memories than i ever would have believed. writing about
yourself seems to be a lot like sticking a branch into clear river-water and
roiling up the muddy bottom.
well, you weren't writing about yourself i hear someone in the peanut-gallery
saying. you were writing about andy dufresne. you're nothing but a minor
character in your own story. but you know, that's just not so. it's all about
me, every damned word of it. andy was the part of me they could never lock up,
the part of me that will rejoice when the gates finally open for me and i walk
out in my cheap suit with my twenty dollars of mad-money in my pocket. that part
of me will rejoice no matter how old and broken and scared the rest of me is. i
guess it's just that andy had more of that part than me, and used it better.
there are others here like me, others who remember andy. we're glad he's gone,
but a little sad, too. some birds are not meant to be caged, that's all. their
feathers are too bright, their songs too sweet and wild. so you let them go, or
when you open the cage to feed them they somehow fly out past you. and the part
of you that knows it was wrong to imprison them in the first place rejoices, but
still, the place where you live is that much more drab and empty for their
departure.
that's the story and i'm glad i told it, even if it is a bit inconclusive and
even though some of the memories the pencil prodded up (like that branch poking
up the river-mud) made me feel a little sad and even older than i am. thank you
for listening. and andy, if you're really down there, as i believe you are, look
at the stars for me just after sunset, and touch the sand, and wade in the
water, and feel free. 
82
 xiv
i never expected to take up this narrative again, but here i am with the
dog-eared, folded pages open on the desk in front of me. here i am adding
another three or four pages, writing in a brand-new tablet. a tablet i bought in
a store-i just walked into a store on portland's congress street and bought it.
i thought i had put finish to my story in a shawshank prison cell on a bleak
january day in 1976. now it's may of 1977 and i am sitting in a small, cheap
room of the brewster hotel in portland, adding to it.
the window is open, and the sound of the traffic floating in seem huge,
exciting, and intimidating. i have to look constantly over at the window and
reassure myself that there are no bars on it. i sleep poorly at night because
the bed in this room, as cheap as the room is, seems much too big and luxurious.
i snap awake every morning promptly at six-thirty, feeling disoriented and
frightened. m) dreams are bad. i have a crazy feeling of free fall. the
sensation is as terrifying as it is exhilarating.
what has happened in my life? can't you guess? i was paroled. after thirty-eight 
83
years of routine hearings and routine denials (in the course of those
thirty-eight years, three lawyers died on me), my parole was granted. i suppose
they decided that, at the age of fifty-eight, i was finally used up enough to be
deemed safe.
i came very close to burning the document you have just read. they search
outgoing parolees almost as carefully as they search incoming "new fish." and
beyond containing enough dynamite to assure me of a quick turnaround and another
six or eight years inside, my "memoirs" contained something else: the name of
the town where i believe andy dufresne to be. mexican police gladly cooperate
with the american police, and i didn't want my freedom-or my unwillingness to
give up the story i'd worked so long and hard to write-to cost andy his.
then i remembered how andy had brought in his five hundred dollars back in 1948,
and i took out my story of him the same way. just to be on the safe side, i
carefully rewrote each page which mentioned zihuatanejo. if the papers had been
found during my "outside search," as they call it at the shank, i would have
gone back in on turnaround . . . but the cops would have been looking for andy
in a peruvian seacoast town named las intrudres.
the parole committee got me a job as a "stock-room assistant" at 310 the big
foodway market at the spruce mall in south portland - which means i became just
one more aging bag-boy. there's only two kinds of bag-boys, you know; the old
ones and the young ones. no one ever looks at either kind. if you shop at the
spruce mall foodway, i may have even taken your groceries out to your car . . .
but you'd have had to have shopped there between march and april of 1977,
because that's as long as i worked there.
at first i didn't think i was going to be able to make it on the outside at all.
i've described prison society as a scaled-down model of your outside world, but
i had no idea of how fast things moved on the outside; the raw speed people move
at. they even talk faster. and louder.
it was the toughest adjustment i've ever had to make, and i haven't finished
making it yet . . . not by a long way. women, for instance. after hardly knowing
that they were half of the human race for forty years, i was suddenly working in
a store filled with them. old women, pregnant women wearing tee-shirts with
arrows pointing downward and a printed motto reading baby here, skinny women
with their nipples poking out at their shirts-a woman wearing something like
that when i went in would have gotten arrested and then had a sanity
hearing-women of every shape and size. i found myself going around with a
semi-hard almost all the time and cursing myself for being a dirty old man.
going to the bathroom, that was another thing. when i had to go (and the urge
always came on me at twenty-five past the hour), i had to fight the almost
overwhelming need to check it with my boss. knowing that was something i could 
84
just go and do in this too bright outside world was one thing; adjusting my
inner self to that knowledge after all those years of checking it with the
nearest screwhead or facing two days in solitary for the oversight . . . that
was something else.
my boss didn't like me. he was a young guy, twenty-six or -seven, and i could
see that i sort of disgusted him, the way a cringing, servile old dog that
crawls up to you on its belly to be petted will disgust a man. christ, i
disgusted myself. but . . . i couldn't make myself stop. i wanted to tell him:
that's what a whole life in prison does for you, young man. it turns everyone in
a position of authority into a master, and you into every master's dog. maybe
you know you've become a dog, even in prison, but since everyone else in gray is
a dog, too, it doesn't seem to matter so much. outside, it does. but i couldn't
tell a young guy like him. he would never understand. neither would my po, a
big, bluff ex-navy man with a huge red beard and a large stock of polish jokes.
he saw me for about five minutes every week. "are you staying out of the bars,
red?" he'd ask when he'd run out of polish jokes. i'd say yeah, and that would
be the end of it until next week.
music on the radio. when i went in, the big bands were just getting up a good
head of steam. now every song sounds like it's about fucking. so many cars. at
first i felt like i was taking my life into my hands every time i crossed the
street.
there was more-everything was strange and frightening-but maybe you get the
idea, or can at least grasp a corner of it. i began to think about doing
something to get back in. when you're on parole, almost anything will serve. i'm
ashamed to say it, but i began to think about stealing some money or shoplifting
stuff from the foodway, anything, to get back in where it was quiet and you knew
everything that was going to come up in the course of the day.
if i had never known andy, i probably would have done that. but i kept thinking
of him, spending all those years chipping patiently away at the cement with his
rock-hammer so he could be free. i thought of that and it made me ashamed and
i'd drop the idea again. oh, you can say he had more reason to be free than i
did- he had a new identity and a lot of money. but that's not really true, you
know. because he didn't know for sure that the new identity was still there, and
without the new identity, the money would always be out of reach. no, what he
needed was just to be free, and if i kicked away what i had, it would be like
spitting in the face of everything he had worked so hard to win back.
so what i started to do on my time off was to hitchhike rides down to the little
town of buxton. this was in the early april of 1977, the snow just starting to
melt off the fields, the air just beginning to be warm, the baseball teams
coming north to start a new season playing the only game i'm sure god approves 
85
of. when i went on these trips, i carried a silva compass in my pocket.
there's a big hay field in buxton, andy had said, and at the north end of that
hayfield there's a rock wall, right oat of a robert frost poem. and somewhere
along the base of that wall is a rock that has no earthly business in a maine
hayfield.
a fool's errand, you say. how many hayfields are there in a small rural town
like buxton? fifty? a hundred? speaking from personal experience, i'd put it at
even higher than that, if you add in the fields now cultivated which might have
been haygrass when andy went in. and if i did find the right one, i might never
know it. because i might overlook that black piece of volcanic glass, or, much
more likely, andy put it into his pocket and took it with him.
so i'd agree with you. a fool's errand, no doubt about it. worse, a dangerous
one for a man on parole, because some of those fields were clearly marked with
no trespassing signs. and, as i've said, they're more than happy to slam your
ass back inside if you get out of line. a fool's errand . . . but so is chipping
at a blank concrete wall for twenty-seven years. and when you're no longer the
man who can get it for you and just an old bag-boy, it's nice to have a hobby to
take your mind off your new life. my hobby was looking for andy's rock.
so i'd hitchhike to buxton and walk the roads. i'd listen to the birds, to the
spring runoff in the culverts, examine the bottles the retreating snows had
revealed-all useless non-returnables, i am sorry to say; the world seems to have
gotten awfully spendthrift since i went into the slam-and looking for hayfields.
most of them could be eliminated right off. no rock walls. others had rock
walls, but my compass told me they were facing the wrong direction. i walked
these wrong ones anyway. it was a comfortable thing to be doing, and on those
outings i really felt free, at peace. an old dog walked with me one saturday.
and one day i saw a winter-skinny deer.
then came april 23rd, a day i'll not forget even if i live another fifty-eight
years. it was a balmy saturday afternoon, and i was walking up what a little boy
fishing from a bridge told me was called the old smith road. i had taken a lunch
in a brown foodway bag, and had eaten it sitting on a rock by the road. when
i was done i carefully buried my leavings, as my dad taught me before he died,
when i was a sprat no older than the fisherman who had named the road for me.
around two o'clock i came to a big field on my left. there was a stone wall at
the far end of it, running roughly northwest. i walked back to it, squelching
over the wet ground, and began to walk the wall. a squirrel scoffed me from an
oak tree.
three-quarters of the way to the end, i saw the rock. no mistake. black glass
and as smooth as silk. a rock with no earthly business in a maine hayfield. for
a long time i just looked at it, feeling that i might cry, for whatever reason. 
86
the squirrel had followed me, and it was still chattering away. my heart was
beating madly.
when i felt i had myself under control, i went to the rock, squatted beside
it-the joints in my knees went off like a double-barreled shotgun-and let my
hand touch it. it was real. i didn't pick it up because i thought there would be
anything under it; i could just as easily have walked away without finding what
was beneath. i certainly clad no plans to take it away with me, because i didn't
feel it was mine to take-i had a feeling that taking that rock from the field
would have been the worst kind of theft. no, i only picked it up to feel it
better, to get the heft of the thing, and, i suppose, to prove its reality by
feeling its satiny texture against my skin.
i had to look at what was underneath for a long time. my eyes saw it, but it
took awhile for my mind to catch up. it was an envelope, carefully wrapped in a
plastic bag to keep away the damp. my name was written across the front in
andy's clear script.
i took the envelope and left the rock where andy had left it, and andy's friend
before him.
 dear red,
 if you're reading this, then you're out. one way or another, you're out. and f
 you've followed along this far, you might be willing to come a little further.
 i think you remember the name of the town, don't you? i could use a good man
 to help me get my project on wheels. meantime, have a drink on me-and do think
 it over. i will be keeping an eye out for you. remember that hope is a good
 thing, red, maybe the best of things, and no good thing ever dies. i will be
 hoping that this letter finds you, and finds you well.
 your friend,
 peter stevens
i didn't read that letter in the field. a kind of terror had come over me, a
need to get away from there before i was seen. to make what may be an
appropriate pun, i was in terror of being apprehended.
i went back to my room and read it there, with the smell of old men's dinners
drifting up the stairwell to me-beefaroni, ricearoni, noodleroni. you can bet
that whatever the old folks of america, the ones on fixed incomes, are eating
tonight, it almost certainly ends in “roni.”
i opened the envelope and read the letter and then i put my head in my arms and
cried. with the letter there were twenty new fifty dollar bills. 
87
and here i am in the brewster hotel, technically a fugitive from justice
again-parole violation is my crime. no one's going to throw up any roadblocks to
catch a criminal wanted on that charge, i guess-wondering what i should do now.
i have this manuscript. i have a small piece of luggage about the size of a
doctor's bag that holds everything i own. i have nineteen fifties, four tens, a
five, three ones, and assorted change. i broke one of the fifties to buy this
tablet of paper and a deck of smokes.
wondering what i should do.
but there's really no question. it always comes down to just two choices. get
busy living or get busy dying.
first i'm going to put this manuscript back in my bag. then i'm going to buckle
it up, grab my coat, go downstairs, and check out of this fleabag. then i'm
going to walk uptown to a bar and put that five-dollar bill down in front of the
bartender and ask him to bring me two straight shots of jack daniel's-one for me
and one for andy dufresne. other than a beer or two, they'll be the first drinks
i've taken as a free man since 1938. then i am going to tip the bartender a
dollar and thank him kindly. i will leave the bar and walk up spring street to
the greyhound terminal there and buy a bus ticket to el paso by way of new york
city. when i get to el paso, i'm going to buy a ticket to mcnary. and when i get
to mcnary, i guess i'll have a chance to find out if an old crook like me can
find a way to float across the border and into mexico.
sure i remember the name. zihuatanejo. a name like that is just too pretty to
forget.
i find i am excited, so excited i can hardly hold the pencil in my trembling
hand. i think it is the excitement that only a free man can feel, a free man
starting a long journey whose conclusion is uncertain.
i hope andy is down there.
i hope i can make it across the border.
i hope to see my friend and shake his hand.
i hope the pacific is as blue as it has been in my dreams.
i hope.
the end 
88 