T HEGreatSummerRead

THE NEW YORK TIMES FREE BOOK SERIES

™

A U G U S T   2 3 ,   2 0 0 4

C H A P T E R S   1 – 4

The

Color of
Water

A

B l a c k

M a n ’ s

T r i b u t e   t o

H i s

Wh i t e
M o t h e r

Here’s your first installment of 
The Color of Water. Look for
another tomorrow. By Sunday, you
will have read the whole book!

J A M E S M C B R I D E

SPONSORED BY

A NEW YORK TIMES COMMUNITY AFFAIRS PROGRAM

I wrote this book for my mother,

and her mother, and mothers everywhere.

In memory of Hudis Shilsky,
Rev. Andrew D. McBride,
and Hunter L. Jordan, Sr.

James McBride is a writer, composer, and saxophonist. A former staff writer for the Wilmington News
Journal, The Boston Globe, People, and the Washington Post, he has also written for the Philadelphia
Inquirer, Rolling Stone, US, and Essence. He is the 1993 recipient of the American Music theater
Festival’s Stephen Stondheim Award for his work in musical theater composition, and has written
songs for Anita Baker, Grover Washington Jr., and Gary Burton, among others. A graduate of Oberlin
College, he holds a master’s degree in journalism from Columbia University. He is married with two
children and lives in South Nyack, New York.

Reprinted by arrangement with Riverhead Books, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.

From The Color of Water by James McBride

Copyright © 1996 by James McBride

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

As a boy, I never knew where my mother was from—where she was born, who her parents were.
When I asked she’d say, “God made me.” When I asked if she was white, she’d say, “I’m light-
skinned,” and change the subject. She raised twelve black children and sent us all to college and in
most cases graduate school. Her children became doctors, professors, chemists, teachers—yet none
of us even knew her maiden name until we were grown. It took me fourteen years to unearth her
remarkable story—the daughter of an Orthodox Jewish rabbi, she married a black man in 1942—
and she revealed it more as a favor to me than out of any desire to revisit her past. Here is her life
as she told it to me, and betwixt and between the pages of her life you will find mine as well.

1.   D E A D

I’m dead.

You want to talk about my family and here I been dead
to them for fifty years. Leave me alone. Don’t bother me. They
want no parts of me and me I don’t want no parts of them.
Hurry up and get this interview over with. I want to watch
Dallas. See, my family, if you had a been part of them, you
wouldn’t have time for this foolishness, your roots, so to speak.
You’d be better off watching the Three Stooges than to inter-
view them, like to go interview my father, forget it. He’d have
a heart attack if he saw you. He’s dead now anyway, or if not
he’s 150 years old.

I was born an Orthodox Jew on April 1, 1921, April
Fool’s  Day,  in  Poland.  I  don’t  remember  the  name  of  the
town where I was born, but I do remember my Jewish name:
Ruchel  Dwajra  Zylska.  My  parents  got  rid  of  that  name
when  we  came  to  America  and  changed  it  to  Rachel
Deborah  Shilsky,  and  I  got  rid  of  that  name  when  I  was
nineteen  and  never  used  it  again  after  I  left Virginia  for
good in 1941. Rachel Shilsky is dead as far as I’m concerned.
She had to die in order for me, the rest of me, to live.

My  family  mourned  me  when  I  married  your  father.
They said kaddish and sat shiva. That’s how Orthodox Jews

mourn their dead. They say prayers, turn their mirrors down,
sit on boxes for seven days, and cover their heads. It’s a real
workout, which is maybe why I’m not a Jew now. There were
too  many  rules  to  follow,  too  many  forbiddens  and  “you
can’ts”  and  “you  mustn’ts,”  but  does  anybody  say  they  love
you? Not in my family we didn’t. We didn’t talk that way. We
said things like, “There’s a box in there for the nails,” or my
father would say, “Be quiet while I sleep.”

My  father’s  name  was  Fishel  Shilsky  and  he  was  an
Orthodox  rabbi.  He  escaped  from  the  Russian  army  and
snuck over the Polish border and married my mother in an
arranged marriage. He used to say he was under fire when
he ran off from the army, and his ability to slick himself out
of anything that wasn’t good for him stayed with him for as
long  as  I  knew  him.  Tateh,  we  called  him.  That  means
father in Yiddish. He was a fox, especially when it came to
money.  He  was  short,  dark,  hairy,  and  gruff.  He  wore  a
white shirt, black pants, and a tallis on his shirtsleeve, and
that was like his uniform. He’d wear those black pants till
they glazed and shined and were ripe enough to stand in the
corner by themselves, but God help you if those pants were
coming your way in a hurry, because he was nobody to fool
with, my father. He was hard as a rock.

My  mother  was  named  Hudis  and  she  was  the  exact

opposite of him, gentle and meek. She was born in 1896 in
the town of Dobryzn, Poland, but if you checked there today,
nobody  would  remember  her  family  because  any  Jews  who
didn’t leave before Hitler got through with Poland were wiped
out in the Holocaust. She was pretty about the face. Dark hair,
high cheekbones, but she had polio. It paralyzed her left side
and left her in overall poor health. Her left hand was useless.
It was bent at the wrist and held close to her chest. She was
nearly blind in her left eye and walked with a severe limp,
dragging her left foot behind her. She was a quiet woman, my
sweet Mameh. That’s what we called her, Mameh. She’s one
person in this world I didn’t do right by…. 

2 .   T H E   B I C Y C L E

When I was fourteen, my mother took up two new hobbies:
riding  a  bicycle  and  playing  piano.  The  piano  I  didn’t
mind, but the bicycle drove me crazy. It was a huge old
clunker, blue with white trim, with big fat tires, huge fend-
ers, and a battery-powered horn built into the middle of
the frame with a button you pushed to make it blow. The
contraption  would  be  a  collector’s  item  now,  probably
worth  about  five  thousand  dollars,  but  back  then  it  was
something my stepfather found on the street in Brooklyn
and hauled home a few months before he died.

I don’t know whether it was his decision to pull out or
not, but I think not. He was seventy-two when he died,
trim,  strong,  easygoing,  seemingly  infallible,  and  though
he was my stepfather, I always thought of him as Daddy.
He  was  a  quiet,  soft-spoken  man  who  wore  old-timey
clothes, fedoras, button-down wool coats, suspenders, and
dressed neatly at all times, regardless of how dirty his work
made  him.  He  did  everything  slowly  and  carefully,  but
beneath  his  tractorlike  slowness  and  outward  gentleness
was a crossbreed of quiet Indian and country black man,
surefooted,  hard,  bold,  and  quick.  He  took  no  guff  and

gave none. He married my mother, a white Jewish woman,
when she had eight mixed-race black children, me being
the youngest at less than a year old. They added four more
children to make it an even twelve and he cared for all of
us  as  if  we  were  his  own.  “I  got  enough  for  a  baseball
team,” he joked. One day he was there, the next—a stroke,
and he was gone.

I virtually dropped out of high school after he died,
failing  every  class.  I  spent  the  year  going  to  movies  on
Forty-second  Street  in  Times  Square  with  my  friends.
“James is going through his revolution,” my siblings snick-
ered.  Still,  my  sisters  were  concerned,  my  older  brothers
angry. I ignored them. Me and my hanging-out boys were
into  the  movies.  Superfly,  Shaft,  and  reefer,  which  we
smoked in as much quantity as possible. I snatched purses.
I shoplifted. I even robbed a petty drug dealer once. And
then in the afternoons, coming home after a day of cutting
school, smoking reefer, waving razors, and riding the sub-
way, I would see my mother pedaling her blue bicycle.

She  would  ride  in  slow  motion  across  our  street,
Murdock Avenue in the St. Albans section of Queens, the
only white person in sight, as cars swerved around her and
black motorists gawked at the strange, middle-aged white
lady riding her ancient bicycle. It was her way of grieving,
though  I  didn’t  know  it  then.  Hunter  Jordan,  my  step-
father, was dead. Andrew McBride, my biological father,
had died while she was pregnant with me fourteen years
earlier. It was clear that Mommy was no longer interested
in getting married again, despite the efforts of a couple of
local preachers who were all Cadillacs and smiles and knew
that she, and thus we, were broke. At fifty-one she was still
slender and pretty, with curly black hair, dark eyes, a large
nose, a sparkling smile, and a bowlegged walk you could
see a mile off. We used to call that “Mommy’s madwalk,”
and if she was doing it in your direction, all hell was gonna
break loose. I’d seen her go up to some pretty tough dudes
and shake her fist in their faces when she was angry—but

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

that  was  before  Daddy  died.  Now  she  seemed  intent  on
playing the piano, dodging bill collectors, forcing us into
college through sheer willpower, and riding her bicycle all
over Queens. She refused to learn how to drive. Daddy’s
old car sat out front for weeks, parked at the curb. Silent.
Clean. Polished. Every day she rode her bike right past it,
ignoring it.

The  image  of  her  riding  that  bicycle  typified  her
whole  existence  to  me.  Her  oddness,  her  complete  non-
awareness of what the world thought of her, a nonchalance
in the face of what I perceived to be imminent danger from
blacks and whites who disliked her for being a white person
in a black world. She saw none of it. She rode so slowly
that if you looked at her from a distance it seemed as if she
weren’t  moving,  the  image  frozen,  painted  against  the
spring  sky,  a  middle-aged  white  woman  on  an  antique
bicycle with black kids zipping past her on Sting-Ray bikes
and skateboards, popping wheelies and throwing baseballs
that whizzed past her head, tossing firecrackers that burst
all around her. She ignored it all. She wore a flower-print
dress and black loafers, her head swiveling back and forth
as she rode shakily past the triangle curve where I played
stickball with my friends, up Lewiston Avenue, down the
hill on Mayville Street where a lovely kid named Roger got
killed in a car accident, back up the hill on Murdock, over
the  driveway  curb,  and  to  the  front  of  our  house.  She
would stop, teetering shakily, catching herself just before
the bike collapsed onto the sidewalk. “Whew!” she’d say,
while my siblings, camped on the stoop of our house to
keep  an  eye  on  her,  shook  their  heads.  My  sister  Dotty
would say, “I sure wish you wouldn’t ride that bike, Ma,”
and I silently agreed, because I didn’t want my friends see-
ing my white mother out there riding a bicycle. She was
already white, that was bad enough, but to go out and ride
an old bike that went out of style a hundred years ago? And
a grown-up no less? I couldn’t handle it.

As a boy, I always thought my mother was strange.

She never cared to socialize with our neighbors. Her past
was a mystery she refused to discuss. She drank tea out of
a glass. She could speak Yiddish. She had an absolute dis-
trust  of  authority  and  an  insistence  on  complete  privacy
which seemed to make her, and my family, even odder. My
family was huge, twelve kids, unlike any other family I’d
ever seen, so many of us that at times Mommy would call
us  by  saying,  “Hey  James—Judy-Henry-Hunter-Kath—
whatever your name is, come here a minute.” It wasn’t that
she forgot who we were, but there were so many of us, she
had no time for silly details like names. She was the com-
mander in chief of my house, because my stepfather did
not live with us. He lived in Brooklyn until near the end of
his life, staying away from the thronging masses to come
home  on  weekends,  bearing  food  and  tricycles  and  the
resolve to fix whatever physical thing we had broken dur-
ing the week. The nuts and bolts of raising us was left to
Mommy,  who  acted  as  chief  surgeon  for  bruises  (“Put
iodine on it”), war secretary (“If somebody hits you, take
your fist and crack ’em”), religious consultant (“Put God
first”),  chief  psychologist  (“Don’t  think  about  it”),  and
financial adviser (“What’s money if your mind is empty?”).
Matters involving race and identity she ignored.

As a kid, I remember wishing I were in the TV show
Father Knows Best, where the father comes home from work
every day wearing a suit and tie and there are only enough
kids  to  fit  on  his  lap,  instead  of  in  my  house,  where  we
walked around with huge holes in our pants, cheap Bo-Bo
sneakers that cost $1.99 at John’s Bargains store, with par-
ents who were busy and distracted, my stepfather appear-
ing only on weekends in sleeveless T-shirt, tools in hand,
and  Mommy  bearing  diapers,  pins,  washcloths,  Q-tips,
and a child in each arm with another pulling at her dress.
She barely had time to wipe the behind of one child before
another began screaming at the top of her lungs. Back in
the  Red  Hook  Housing  Projects  in  Brooklyn,  where  we
lived  before  moving  to  the  relative  bliss  of  St.  Albans,

Queens,  Mommy  put  us  to  bed  each  night  like  slabs  of
meat, laying us out three and four to a bed, one with his
head to the headboard, the next with his feet to the head-
board, and so on. “Head up, toes down,” she called it as
she kissed us good night and laid us out in the proper posi-
tion. The moment she left the room we’d fight over who
got to sleep next to the wall. “I got the inside!” I’d shout,
and Richard, the brother above me and thus my superior,
would shake his head and say, “No, no, no. David sleeps
on the inside. I have the middle. You, knucklehead, have
the outside,” so all night I’d inhale David’s breath and eat
Richie’s toes, and when I couldn’t stand the combination of
toes and breath any longer I’d turn over and land on the
cold cement floor with a clunk.

It  was  kill  or  be  killed  in  my  house,  and  Mommy
understood that, in fact created the system. You were left
to your own devices or so you thought until you were at
your very wits’ end, at which time she would step in and
rescue you. I was terrified when it came my turn to go to
school.  Although  P.S.  118  was  only  eight  blocks  away,  I
wasn’t  allowed  to  walk  there  with  my  siblings  because
kindergarten  students  were  required  to  ride  the  bus.  On
the ill-fated morning, Mommy chased me all around the
kitchen trying to dress me as my siblings laughed at my ter-
ror.  “The  bus  isn’t  bad,”  one  quipped,  “except  for  the
snakes.” Another added, “Sometimes the bus never brings
you home.” Guffaws all around.

“Be quiet,” Mommy said, inspecting my first-day-of-
school  attire.  My  clothes  were  clean,  but  not  new.  The
pants had been Billy’s, the shirt was David’s, the coat had
been passed down from Dennis to Billy to David to Richie
to me. It was a gray coat with a fur collar that had literally
been chewed up by somebody. Mommy dusted it off with
a whisk broom, set out eight or nine bowls, poured oat-
meal in each one, left instructions for the eldest to feed the
rest, then ran a comb through my hair. The sensation was
like a tractor pulling my curls off. “C’mon,” she said, “I’ll

walk  you  to  the  bus  stop.”  Surprise  reward.  Me  and
Mommy alone. It was the first time I remember ever being
alone with my mother.

It  became  the  high  point  of  my  day,  a  memory  so
sweet  it  is  burned  into  my  mind  like  a  tattoo,  Mommy
walking me to the bus stop and every afternoon picking
me up, standing on the corner of New Mexico and 114th
Road, clad in a brown coat, her black hair tied in a color-
ful scarf, watching with the rest of the parents as the yellow
school bus swung around the corner and came to a stop
with a hiss of air brakes.

Gradually, as the weeks passed and the terror of going to
school  subsided,  I  began  to  notice  something  about  my
mother, that she looked nothing like the other kids’ mothers.
In fact, she looked more like my kindergarten teacher, Mrs.
Alexander, who was white. Peering out the window as the
bus rounded the corner and the front doors flew open, I
noticed that Mommy stood apart from the other mothers,
rarely speaking to them. She stood behind them, waiting
calmly,  hands  in  her  coat  pockets,  watching  intently
through the bus windows to see where I was, then smiling
and  waving  as  I  yelled  my  greeting  to  her  through  the
window. She’d quickly grasp my hand as I stepped off the
bus,  ignoring  the  stares  of  the  black  women  as  she
whisked me away.

One afternoon as we walked home from the bus stop,
I asked Mommy why she didn’t look like the other mothers.

“Because I’m not them,” she said.
“Who are you?” I asked.
“I’m your mother.”
“Then why don’t you look like Rodney’s mother, or

Pete’s mother? How come you don’t look like me?”

She sighed and shrugged. She’d obviously been down
this road many times. “I do look like you. I’m your mother.
You ask too many questions. Educate your mind. School is
important. Forget Rodney and Pete. Forget their mothers.
You remember school. Forget everything else. Who cares

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

about Rodney and Pete! When they go one way, you go
the other way. Understand? When they go one way, you
go the other way. You hear me?”

“Yes.”
“I know what I’m talking about. Don’t follow none
of  them  around.  You  stick  to  your  brothers  and  sisters,
that’s it. Don’t tell nobody your business neither!” End of
discussion.

A couple of weeks later the bus dropped me off and
Mommy  was  not  there.  I  panicked.  Somewhere  in  the
back  of  my  mind  was  the  memory  of  her  warning  me,
“You’re going to have to learn to walk home by yourself,”
but  that  memory  blinked  like  a  distant  fog  light  in  a
stormy sea and it drowned in my panic. I was lost. My
house was two blocks away, but it might as well have been
ten miles because I had no idea where it was. I stood on
the  corner  and  bit  back  my  tears.  The  other  parents
regarded  me  sympathetically  and  asked  me  my  address,
but I was afraid to tell them. In my mind was Mommy’s
warning,  drilled  into  all  twelve  of  us  children  from  the
time we could walk: “Never, ever, ever tell your business
to nobody,” and I shook my head no, I don’t know my
address.  They  departed  one  by  one,  until  a  sole  figure
remained, a black father, who stood in front of me with
his  son,  saying,  “Don’t  worry,  your  mother  is  coming
soon.” I ignored him. He was blocking my view, the tears
clouding my vision as I tried to peer behind him, looking
down  the  block  to  see  if  that  familiar  brown  coat  and
white face would appear in the distance. It didn’t. In fact
there wasn’t anyone coming at all, except a bunch of kids
and they certainly didn’t look like Mommy. They were a
motley crew of girls and boys, ragged, with wild hairdos
and unkempt jackets, hooting and making noise, and only
when they were almost upon me did I recognize the faces
of my elder siblings and my little sister Kathy who trailed
behind them. I ran into their arms and collapsed in tears
as they gathered around me, laughing. 

3 .   K O S H E R

My parents’ marriage was put together by a rov, a rabbi of a
high order who goes to each of the parents and sees about the
dowry and arranges the marriage contract properly according
to Jewish law, which meant love had nothing to do with it.
See, my mother’s family had all the class and money. Tateh, I
don’t know where his family was from. Mameh was his meal
ticket to America, and once he got here, he was done with her.
He came here under the sponsorship of my mother’s eldest sis-
ter, Laurie, and her husband, Paul Schiffman. You couldn’t
just walk into America. You had to have a sponsor, someone
who would say, “I’ll vouch for this person.” He came first and
after a few months sent for his family—me, Mameh, and my
older brother, Sam. I was two years old and Sam was four
when  we  arrived,  so  I  don’t  remember  anything  about  our
long, perilous journey to America other than what I’ve seen in
the movies. I have a legal paper in the shoebox under my bed
that  says  I  arrived  here  on  August  23,  1923,  on  a  steamer
called the Austergeist. I kept that paper on my person wher-
ever I went for over twenty years. That was my protection. I
didn’t want them to throw me out. Who? Anybody…the gov-
ernment, my father, anybody. I thought they could throw you
out of America like they throw you out of a baseball game. My
father would say, “I’m a citizen and you’re not. I can send you
back to Europe anytime I want.” He used to threaten us with
that, to send us back to Europe, especially my mother, because
she was the last of her family to get here and she had spent a
good deal of her life running from Russian soldiers in Poland.
She used to talk about the Czar or the Kaiser and how the
Russian soldiers would come into the village and line up the
Jews and shoot them in cold blood. “I had to run for my life,”
she used to say. “I held you and your brother in my arms as I
ran.” She was terrified of Europe and happy to be in America.
When we first got off the boat we lived with my grand-
parents  Zaydeh  and  Bubeh  on  115th  and  St.  Nicholas  in
Manhattan. Although I was a tiny child, I remember Zaydeh

well. He had a long beard and was jolly and always seemed to
be drinking hot tea out of a glass. All the men in my family
had  long  beards.  Zaydeh  kept  a  picture  of  himself  and  my
grandmother on his bureau. It was taken while they were in
Europe. They were standing side by side, Zaydeh wearing a
black suit, with a hat and beard, and Bubeh wearing a wig,
or shaytl, as was the religious custom. Bubeh was bald under-
neath that wig, I believe. That’s why women were supposed to
keep their heads covered. They were bald.

I enjoyed my grandparents. They were warm and I loved
them the way any grandchild loves a grandparent. They kept
a clean, comfortable apartment, furnished with heavy dark
mahogany pieces. Their dining room table was covered with a
sparkling white lace tablecloth at all times. They were strictly
Orthodox and ate kosher every day. You don’t know anything
about kosher. You think it’s a halvah candy bar. You need to
read  up  on  it  because  I  ain’t  no  expert. They  got  folks  who
write whole books about it, go find them and ask them! Or
read the Bible! Shoot! Who am I? I ain’t nobody! I can’t be
telling the world this! I don’t know! The way we did it, you
had different table settings for every meal, different tablecloths,
different  dishes,  forks,  spoons,  knives,  everything.  And  you
couldn’t mix your meals. Like you had your dairy meals and
your meat meals. So you eat all dairy one meal and all meat
the next. No mixing it up. No pork, either—no pork chops
with potato salad, no bacon and eggs, forget all that. You sit
your butt down and eat what you were supposed to, and do
what you were supposed to. We used a special-type tablecloth
for  dairy  meals  because  you  could  clean  it  with  a  simple
dishrag as opposed to washing it. Then every Friday evening
at sundown you had to light your candles and pray and the
Sabbath began. That lasted till sundown Saturday. No light
switches could be turned on or off, no tearing of paper, no rid-
ing in cars or going to the movies, not even a simple thing like
lighting a stove. You had to sit tight and read by candlelight.
Or just sit tight. For me that was the hardest thing, sitting
tight. Even as a girl, I was a runner. I liked to get out of the

house and go. Run. The only thing I was allowed to do on the
Sabbath was read romance magazines. I did that for years.

I remember when Zaydeh died in the apartment. I don’t
know how he died, he just died. In those days people didn’t
linger and fool around like people do now, with tubes hang-
ing  out  their  mouths  and  making  doctors  rich  and  all  this.
They just died. Dead. Bye. Well, he was dead, honey. They
laid him out on his bed and brought us children into his bed-
room to look at him. They had to lift me and my brother Sam
off the floor to see him. His beard lay flat on his chest and his
hands were folded. He had a little black tie on. He seemed
asleep. I remember saying to myself that he couldn’t possibly be
dead, because it seemed not too long before that he’d been alive
and joking and being silly and now here he was dead as a rock.
They buried him before sundown that day and we sat shiva
for him. All the mirrors in the house were covered. The adults
covered their heads. Everyone sat on boxes. My grandmother
wore black for a long time afterwards. But you know, I felt
they were burying him too quick. I wanted to ask someone,
“Suppose Zaydeh isn’t dead? Suppose he’s joking and wakes up
to find out he’s buried?” But a child in my family didn’t ask
questions. You did what you were told. You obeyed, period.

I  always  remembered  that,  and  I  think  that’s  why  I’m
claustrophobic today, because I didn’t know what death was.
You know my family didn’t talk of death. You weren’t allowed
to  say  the  word. The  old-time  Jews,  they’d  spit  on  the  floor
when they said the word “death” in Yiddish. I don’t know if it
was superstition or what, but if my father said “death” you can
bet two seconds later spit would be flying out his mouth. Why?
Why not! He could throw up on the floor in his house and no
one was allowed to say a word to him. Why he’d spit I do not
know, but when my grandfather passed away I kept asking
myself, “Suppose Zaydeh isn’t dead, then what? And he’s sur-
rounded  by  all  those  dead  people  too,  and  he’s  still  alive?”
Lord…anything that’s too closed in makes me feel like I can’t
breathe and I’m going to die. That’s why I tell y’all to make
sure I’m dead when I die. Kick me and pinch me and make

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

sure I’m gone, because the thought of being buried alive, lying
there all smushed up and smothered and surrounded by dead
people and I’m still alive, Lord, that scares me to death. 

4 .   B L A C K   P O W E R

When  I  was  a  boy,  I  used  to  wonder  where  my  mother
came from, how she got on this earth. When I asked her
where she was from, she would say, “God made me,” and
change  the  subject.  When  I  asked  her  if  she  was  white,
she’d say, “No. I’m light-skinned,” and change the subject
again. Answering questions about her personal history did
not jibe with Mommy’s view of parenting twelve curious,
wild, brown-skinned children. She issued orders and her
rule was law. Since she refused to divulge details about her-
self  or  her  past,  and  because  my  stepfather  was  largely
unavailable  to  deal  with  questions  about  himself  or  Ma,
what I learned of Mommy’s past I learned from my sib-
lings. We traded information on Mommy the way people
trade baseball cards at trade shows, offering bits and pieces
fraught with gossip, nonsense, wisdom, and sometimes just
plain foolishness. “What does it matter to you?” my older
brother  Richie  scoffed  when  I  asked  him  if  we  had  any
grandparents. “You’re adopted anyway.”

My siblings and I spent hours playing tricks and teas-
ing one another. It was our way of dealing with realities over
which we had no control. I told Richie I didn’t believe him.
“I  don’t  care  if  you  believe  me  or  not,”  he  sniffed.
“Mommy’s not your real mother. Your real mother’s in jail.”

“You’re lying!”
“You’ll see when Mommy takes you back to your real
mother next week. Why do you think she’s been so nice to
you all week?”

Suddenly it occurred to me that Mommy had been
nice to me all week. But wasn’t she nice to me all the time?
I  couldn’t  remember,  partly  because  within  my  confused

eight-year-old  reasoning  was  a  growing  fear  that  maybe
Richie was right. Mommy, after all, did not really look like
me. In fact, she didn’t look like Richie, or David—or any
of her children for that matter. We were all clearly black, of
various shades of brown, some light brown, some medium
brown,  some  very  light-skinned,  and  all  of  us  had  curly
hair. Mommy was, by her own definition, “light-skinned,”
a  statement  which  I  had  initially  accepted  as  fact  but  at
some point later decided was not true. My best friend Billy
Smith’s mother was as light as Mommy was and had red
hair to boot, but there was no question in my mind that
Billy’s mother was black and my mother was not. There
was something inside me, an ache I had, like a constant
itch that got bigger and bigger as I grew, that told me. It
was in my blood, you might say, and however the notion
got there, it bothered me greatly. Yet Mommy refused to
acknowledge her whiteness. Why she did so was not clear,
but even my teachers seemed to know she was white and I
wasn’t.  On  open  school  nights,  the  question  most  often
asked  by  my  schoolteachers  was:  “Is  James  adopted?”
which  always  prompted  an  outraged  response  from
Mommy.

I told Richie: “If I’m adopted, you’re adopted too.”
“Nope,”  Richie  replied.  “Just  you,  and  you’re  going

back to your real mother in jail.”

“I’ll run away first.”
“You can’t do that. Mommy will get in trouble if you
do that. You don’t want to see Ma get in trouble, do you?
It’s not her fault that you’re adopted, is it?”

He had me then. Panic set in. “But I don’t want to go

to my real mother. I want to stay here with Ma…”

“You gotta go. I’m sorry, man.”
This went on until I was in tears. I remember pacing
about  nervously  all  day  while  Richie,  knowing  he  had
ruined my life, cackled himself to sleep. That night I lay
wide awake in bed waiting for Mommy to get home from
work at two A.M., whereupon she laid the ruse out as I sat

at  the  kitchen  table  in  my  tattered  Fruit  of  the  Loom
underwear. “You’re not adopted,” she laughed.

“So you’re my real mother?”
“Of course I am.” Big kiss.
“Then who’s my grandparents?”
“Your grandpa Nash died and so did your grand-ma

Etta.”

“Who were they?”
“They were your father’s parents.”
“Where were they from?”
“From down south. You remember them?”
I had a faint recollection of my grandmother Etta, an
ancient  black  woman  with  a  beautiful  face  who  seemed
very confused, walking around with a blue dress and a fish-
ing pole, the bait, tackle, and line dragging down around
her ankles. She didn’t seem real to me.

“Did you know them, Ma?”
“I knew them very, very well.”
“Did they love you?”
“Why do you ask so many questions?”
“I just want to know. Did they love you? Because your

own parents didn’t love you, did they?”

“My own parents loved me.”
“Then where are they?”
A short silence. “My mother died many, many years
ago,” she said. “My father, he was a fox. No more questions
tonight. You want some coffee cake?” Enough said. If get-
ting  Mommy’s  undivided  attention  for  more  than  five
minutes was a great feat in a family of twelve kids, then get-
ting a midnight snack in my house was a greater thrill. I
cut the questions and ate the cake, though it never stopped
me  from  wondering,  partly  because  of  my  own  growing
sense  of  self,  and  partly  because  of  fear  for  her  safety,
because even as a child I had a clear sense that black and
white folks did not get along, which put her, and us, in a
pretty tight space.

In 1966, when I was nine, black power had permeated

every element of my neighborhood in St. Albans, Queens.
Malcolm X had been killed the year before and had grown
larger in death than in life. Afros were in style. The Black
Panthers  were  a  force.  Public  buildings,  statues,  monu-
ments, even trees, met the evening in their original bland
colors  and  reemerged  the  next  morning  painted  in  the
sparkling  “liberation  colors”  of  red,  black,  and  green.
Congas played at night on the streets while teenyboppers
gathered to talk of revolution. My siblings marched around
the house reciting poetry from the Last Poets, a sort of rap
group who recited in-your-face poetry with conga and fas-
cinating  vocal  lines  serving  as  a  musical  backdrop,  with
songs titled “Niggers Are Scared of Revolution” and “On
the  Subway.”  Every  Saturday  morning  my  friends  and  I
would pedal our bicycles to the corner of Dunkirk Street
and Ilion Avenue to watch the local drag racers near the Sun
Dew soft drink factory, trying to see who could drive the
fastest  over  a  dip  in  the  road  that  sent  even  the  slowest-
moving car airborne. My stepfather hit that dip at fifteen
miles an hour in his ’64 Pontiac and I bounced high in my
seat. These guys hit it at ninety and their cars flew like birds,
barreling  through  the  air  and  landing  fifteen  feet  away,
often skidding out of control, sometimes smacking against
the wall of the Sun Dew factory before wobbling away in a
pile of bent metal, grilles, and fenders. Their cars had names
like  “Smokin’  Joe”  and  “Miko”  and  “Dream  Machine”
scrawled  on  the  hoods,  but  our  favorite  was  a  gleaming
black, souped-up GTO with the words “Black Power” writ-
ten in smooth white script across the hood and top. It was
the  fastest  and  its  driver  was,  of  course,  the  coolest.  He
drove like a madman, and after leaving some poor Corvette
in the dust, he’d power his mighty car in a circle, wheel it
around, and do a victory lap for us, driving by at low speed,
one muscled arm angling out the window, his car rumbling
powerfully, while we whistled and cheered, raising our fists
and yelling, “Black power!” He’d laugh and burn rubber for
us,  tires  screeching,  roaring  away  in  a  burst  of  gleaming

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

metal  and  hot  exhaust,  his  taillights  flashing  as  he  disap-
peared into the back alleyways before the cops had a chance
to bust him. We thought he was God.

But there was a part of me that feared black power very
deeply for the obvious reason. I thought black power would
be the end of my mother. I had swallowed the white man’s
fear of the Negro, as we were called back then, whole. It
began with a sober white newsman on our black-and-white
television  set  introducing  a  news  clip  showing  a  Black
Panther rally, led by Bobby Seale or Huey Newton or one
of  those  young  black  militant  leaders,  screaming  to  hun-
dreds  and  hundreds  of  angry  African-American  students,
“Black power! Black power! Black power!” while the crowd
roared.  It  frightened  the  shit  out  of  me.  I  thought  to
myself,  These  people  will  kill  Mommy.  Mommy,  on  the
other  hand,  seemed  unconcerned.  Her  motto  was,  “If  it
doesn’t involve your going to school or church, I could care
less about it and my answer is no whatever it is.”

She  insisted  on  absolute  privacy,  excellent  school
grades,  and  trusted  no  outsiders  of  either  race. We  were
instructed never to reveal details of our home life to any
figures  of  authority:  teachers,  social  workers,  cops,  store-
keepers,  or  even  friends.  If  anyone  asked  us  about  our
home life, we were taught to respond with, “I don’t know,”
and for years I did just that. Mommy’s house was an entire
world that she created. She appointed the eldest child at
home  to  be  “king”  or  “queen”  to  run  the  house  in  her
absence and we took it from there, creating court jesters,
slaves, musicians, poets, pets, and clowns. Playing in the
street was discouraged and often forbidden and if you did
manage  to  slip  out,  “Get  your  butt  in  this  house  before
dark,” she would warn, a rule she enforced to the bone. I
often played that rule out to its very edge, stealing into the
house  at  dusk,  just  as  the  last  glimmer  of  sunlight  was
peeking over the western horizon, closing the door softly,
hoping Mommy had gone to work, only to turn around
and find her standing before me, hands on hips, whipping

belt  in  hand,  eyes  flicking  angrily  back  and  forth  to  the
window, then to me, lips pursed, trying to decide whether
it was light or dark outside. “It’s still light,” I’d suggest, my
voice  wavering,  as  my  siblings  gathered  behind  her  to
watch the impending slaughter.

“That looks like light to you?” she’d snap, motioning

to the window.

“Looks  pretty  dark,”  my  siblings  would  chirp  from
behind her. “It’s definitely dark, Ma!” they’d shout, stifling
their giggles. If I was lucky a baby would wail in another
room and she’d be off, hanging the belt on the doorknob as
she went. “Don’t do it again,” she’d warn over her shoulder,
and I was a free man.

But even if she had any interest in black power, she
had no time to talk about it. She worked the swing shift at
Chase Manhattan Bank as a typist, leaving home at three P.M.
and returning around two A.M., so she had little time for
games, and even less time for identity crises. She and my
father  brought  a  curious  blend  of  Jewish-European  and
African-American  distrust  and  paranoia  into  our  house.
On his end, my father, Andrew McBride, a Baptist minis-
ter,  had  his  doubts  about  the  world  accepting  his  mixed
family. He always made sure his kids never got into trouble,
was concerned about money, and trusted the providence of
the Holy Father to do the rest. After he died and Mommy
remarried, my stepfather, Hunter Jordan, seemed to pick
up  where  my  father  left  off,  insistent  on  education  and
church. On her end, Mommy had no model for raising us
other  than  the  experience  of  her  own  Orthodox  Jewish
family,  which  despite  the  seeming  flaws—an  unbending
nature, a stridency, a focus on money, a deep distrust of all
outsiders, not to mention her father’s tyranny—represented
the best and worst of the immigrant mentality: hard work,
no nonsense, quest for excellence, distrust of authority fig-
ures, and a deep belief in God and education. My parents
were nonmaterialistic. They believed that money without
knowledge  was  worthless,  that  education  tempered  with

religion was the way to climb out of poverty in America,
and over the years they were proven right.

Yet conflict was a part of our lives, written into our
very faces, hands, and arms, and to see how contradiction
lived and survived in its essence, we had to look no farther
than  our  own  mother.  Mommy’s  contradictions  crashed
and  slammed  against  one  another  like  bumper  cars  at
Coney  Island.  White  folks,  she  felt,  were  implicitly  evil
toward blacks, yet she forced us to go to white schools to get
the best education. Blacks could be trusted more, but any-
thing  involving  blacks  was  probably  slightly  substandard.
She disliked people with money yet was in constant need of
it. She couldn’t stand racists of either color and had great
distaste  for  bourgeois  blacks  who  sought  to  emulate  rich
whites by putting on airs and “doing silly things like cover-
ing  their  couches  with  plastic  and  holding  teacups  with
their pinkies out.” “What fools!” she’d hiss. She wouldn’t be
bothered with parents who bragged about their children’s
accomplishments, yet she insisted we strive for the highest
professional  goals.  She  was  against  welfare  and  never
applied for it despite our need, but championed those who
availed themselves of it. She hated restaurants and would
not enter one even if the meals served were free. She actu-
ally preferred to be among the poor, the working-class poor
of  the  Red  Hook  Housing  Projects  in  Brooklyn,  the
cement mixers, bakers, doughnut makers, grandmothers,
and  soul-food  church  partisans  who  were  her  lifelong
friends. It was with them that she and my father started the
New Brown Memorial Baptist Church, a small storefront
church  which  still  stands  in  Red  Hook  today.  Mommy
loves that church and to this day still loves Red Hook, one
of the most dangerous and neglected housing projects in
New  York  City.  On  any  given  day  she’ll  get  up  in  the
morning, take the New Jersey Transit train from her home
in Ewing, New Jersey, to Manhattan, then take the subway
to Brooklyn, and wander around the projects like the Pope,
the only white person in sight, waving to friends, stepping

past the drug addicts, smiling at the young mothers pushing
their children in baby carriages, slipping into the poorly lit
hallway  of  80  Dwight  Street  while  the  young  dudes  in
hooded sweatshirts stare balefully at the strange, bowlegged
old white lady in Nikes and red sweats who slowly hobbles
up the three flights of dark, urine-smelling stairs on arthritic
knees to visit her best friend, Mrs. Ingram in apartment 3G.
As a boy, I often found Mommy’s ease among black
people surprising. Most white folks I knew seemed to have
a great fear of blacks. Even as a young child, I was aware
of that. I’d read it in the paper, between the lines of my
favorite sport columnists in the New York Post and the old
Long  Island  Press,  in  their  refusal  to  call  Cassius  Clay
Muhammad Ali, in their portrayal of Floyd Patterson as a
“good Negro Catholic,” and in their burning criticism of
black athletes like Bob Gibson of the St. Louis Cardinals,
whom I idolized. In fact I didn’t even have to open the
paper  to  see  it.  I  could  see  it  in  the  faces  of  the  white
people who stared at me and Mommy and my siblings
when  we  rode  the  subway,  sometimes  laughing  at  us,
pointing, muttering things like, “Look at her with those
little niggers.” I remember when a white man shoved her
angrily  as  she  led  a  group  of  us  onto  an  escalator,  but
Mommy  simply  ignored  him.  I  remember  two  black
women pointing at us, saying, “Look at that white bitch,”
and  a  white  man  screaming  at  Mommy  somewhere  in
Manhattan, calling her a “nigger lover.” Mommy ignored
them  all,  unless  the  insults  threatened  her  children,  at
which time she would turn and fight back like an alley cat,
hissing, angry, and fearless. She had a casual way of ignor-
ing affronts, slipping past insults to her whiteness like a
seasoned boxer slips punches. When Malcolm X, the sup-
posed  demon  of  the  white  man,  was  killed,  I  asked  her
who  he  was  and  she  said,  “He  was  a  man  ahead  of  his
time.” She actually liked Malcolm X. She put him in near-
ly the same category as her other civil rights heroes, Paul
Robeson,  Jackie  Robinson,  Eleanor  Roosevelt,  A.  Philip

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

Randolph, Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Kennedys—
any Kennedy. When Malcolm X talked about “the white
devil” Mommy simply felt those references didn’t apply to
her.  She  viewed  the  civil  rights  achievements  of  black
Americans with pride, as if they were her own. And she
herself occasionally talked about “the white man” in the
third person, as if she had nothing to do with him, and in
fact she didn’t, since most of her friends and social circle
were black women from church. “What’s the matter with
these white folks?” she’d muse after reading some craziness
in the New York Daily News. “They’re fighting over this
man’s money now that he’s dead. None of them wanted
him when he was alive, and now look at them. Forget it,
honey”—this  is  Mommy  talking  to  the  newspaper—
“your  husband’s  dead,  okay?  He’s  dead—poop! You  had
your chance. Is money gonna bring him back? No!” Then
she’d  turn  to  us  and  deliver  the  invariable  lecture:  “You
don’t need money. What’s money if your mind is empty!
Educate your mind! Is this world crazy or am I the crazy
one? It’s probably me.”

Indeed it probably was—at least, I thought so. I knew
of no other white woman who would board the subway in
Manhattan at one o’clock every morning and fall asleep till
she  got  to  her  stop  in  Queens  forty-five  minutes  later.
Often I could not sleep until I heard her key hit the door.
Her lack of fear for her safety—particularly among blacks,
where she often stuck out like a sore thumb and seemed an
easy  target  for  muggers—had  me  stumped.  As  a  grown
man,  I  understand  now,  understand  how  her  Christian
principles and trust in God kept her going through all her
life’s  battles,  but  as  a  boy,  my  faith  was  not  that  strong.
Mommy once took me to Harlem to visit my stepsister,
Jacqueline, whom we called Jack and who was my father’s
daughter  by  a  previous  marriage  and  more  like  an  aunt
than a sister. The two of them sat in Jack’s parlor and talked
into the night while Jack cooked big plates of soul food,
macaroni and cheese, sweet potato pies, and biscuits for us.

“Take this home to the kids, Ruth,” Jack told Ma. We put
the food in shopping bags and took it on the subway with-
out incident, but when we got off the bus in St. Albans
near our house, two black men came up behind us and one
of them grabbed Mommy’s purse. The shopping bag full of
macaroni and cheese and sweet potato pies burst open and
food  flew  everywhere  as  Mommy  held  on  to  her  purse,
spinning around in a crazy circle with the mugger, neither
saying  a  word  as  they  both  desperately  wrestled  for  the
purse,  whirling  from  the  sidewalk  into  the  dark  empty
street like two ballerinas locked in a death dance. I stood
frozen  in  shock,  watching.  Finally  the  mugger  got  the
purse and ran off as his buddy laughed at him, and Mommy
fell to the ground.

She got up, calmly took my hand, and began to walk

home without a word.

“You okay?” she asked me after a few moments.
I nodded. I was so frightened I couldn’t speak. All the
food that Jack had cooked for us lay on the ground behind
us, ruined. “Why didn’t you scream?” I asked, when I finally
got my tongue back.

“It’s just a purse,” she said. “Don’t worry about it. Let’s

just get home.”

The incident confirmed my fears that Mommy was
always  in  danger.  Every  summer  we  joined  the  poor
inner-city  kids  the  Fresh  Air  Fund  organization  sent  to
host  families  or  to  summer  camps  for  free. The  luckier
ones among my siblings got to stay with host families, but
I  had  to  go  to  camps  where  they  housed  ten  of  us  in  a
cabin  for  two  weeks  at  a  time.  Sometimes  they  seemed
closer to prison or job corps than camp. Kids fought all
the time. The food was horrible. I was constantly fighting.
Kids called me Cochise because of my light skin and curly
hair.  Despite  all  that,  I  loved  it. The  first  time  I  went,
Mommy  took  me  to  the  roundup  point,  a  community
center  in  Far  Rockaway,  once  the  home  of  middle-class
whites  and  Jews  like  playwright  Neil  Simon,  but  long

T H E   C O L O R   O F   W A T E R  

|       B Y   J A M E S   M C B R I D E

since turned black, and it seemed that the only white per-
son for miles was my own mother. The camp organizers
set up a table inside where they removed our shoes and
shirts and inspected our toes for athlete’s foot, checked us
for measles and chicken pox, then sent us outside to board
a yellow school bus for the long journey to upstate New
York.  As  I  sat  on  the  bus  peering  out  the  window  at
Mommy, the only white face in a sea of black faces, a black
man walked up with his son. He had a mustache and a
goatee and wore black leather pants, a black leather jacket,
a ton of jewelry, and a black beret. He seemed outstand-
ingly cool. His kid was very handsome, well dressed, and
quite refined. He placed his kid’s bags in the back of the
bus and when the kid went to step on the bus, instead of
hugging the child, the father offered his hand, and father
and son did a magnificent, convoluted black-power soul
handshake called the “dap,” the kind of handshake that
lasts  five  minutes,  fingers  looping,  thumbs  up,  thumbs
down, index fingers collapsing, wrists snapping, bracelets
tingling.  It  seemed  incredibly  hip.  The  whole  bus
watched. Finally the kid staggered breathlessly onto the
bus and sat behind me, tapping at the window and wav-
ing at his father, who was now standing next to Mommy,
waving at his kid.

“Where’d you learn that handshake?” someone asked

the kid.

“My  father  taught  me,”  he  said  proudly.  “He’s  a

Black Panther.”

The bus roared to life as I panicked. A Black Panther?
Next to Mommy? It was my worst nightmare come true. I
had no idea who the Panthers truly were. I had swallowed
the media image of them completely.

The bus clanked into gear as I got up to open my
window. I  wanted  to  warn  Mommy.  Suppose  the  Black
Panther wanted to kill her? The window was stuck. I tried
to move to another window. A counselor grabbed me and
sat me down. I said, “I have to tell my mother something.”

“Write her a letter,” he said.
I  jumped  into  the  seat  of  the  Black  Panther’s  son
behind me—his window was open. The counselor placed
me back in my seat.

“Mommy, Mommy!” I yelled at the closed window.

Mommy was waving. The bus pulled away.

I shouted, “Watch out for him!” but we were too far

away and my window was shut. She couldn’t hear me.

I saw the Black Panther waving at his son. Mommy

waved at me. Neither seemed to notice the other.

When they were out of sight, I turned to the Black
Panther’s son sitting behind me and punched him square
in the face with my fist. The kid held his jaw and stared
at me in shock as his face melted into a knot of disbelief
and tears. 

C O N T I N U E D   T O M O R R O W

