


[CHARACTER]
[CHARACTER] is the mightiest warrior in the trojan army. although
he meets his match in achilles, he wreaks havoc on the achaean army during
achilles' period of absence. he leads the assault that finally penetrates
the achaean ramparts, he is the first and only trojan to set fire
to an achaean ship, and he kills patroclus. yet his leadership contains
discernible flaws, especially toward the end of the epic, when the
participation of first patroclus and then achilles reinvigorates
the achaean army. he demonstrates a certain cowardice when, twice
in book 17, he flees great ajax. indeed,
he recovers his courage only after receiving the insults of his
comrades--first glaucus and then aeneas. he can often become emotionally
carried away as well, treating patroclus and his other victims with
rash cruelty. later, swept up by a burst of confidence, he foolishly
orders the trojans to camp outside troy's walls the night before
achilles returns to battle, thus causing a crucial downfall the
next day.
but although [CHARACTER] may prove overly impulsive and insufficiently
prudent, he does not come across as arrogant or overbearing, as
agamemnon does. moreover, the fact that [CHARACTER] fights in his homeland,
unlike any of the achaean commanders, allows homer to develop him
as a tender, family-oriented man. [CHARACTER] shows deep, sincere love
for his wife and children. indeed, he even treats his brother paris
with forgiveness and indulgence, despite the man's lack of spirit
and preference for lovemaking over military duty. [CHARACTER] never turns
violent with him, merely aiming frustrated words at his cowardly
brother. moreover, although [CHARACTER] loves his family, he never loses
sight of his responsibility to troy. admittedly, he runs from achilles
at first and briefly entertains the delusional hope of negotiating
his way out of a duel. however, in the end he stands up to the mighty
warrior, even when he realizes that the gods have abandoned him.
his refusal to flee even in the face of vastly superior forces makes
him the most tragic figure in the poem.
