


[CHARACTER]
much has been written regarding hemingway's portrayal
of female characters. with the advent of feminist criticism, readers
have become more vocal about their dissatisfaction with hemingway's depictions
of women, which, according to critics such as leslie a. fiedler,
tend to fall into one of two categories: overly dominant shrews,
like lady brett in the sun also rises, and overly
submissive confections, like [CHARACTER] in a farewell
to arms. hemingway, fiedler maintains, was at his best
dealing with men without women; when he started to involve female
characters in his writing, he reverted to uncomplicated stereotypes. a
farewell to arms certainly supports such a reading: it
is easy to see how catherine's blissful submission to domesticity,
especially at the novel's end, might rankle contemporary readers
for whom lines such as "i'm having a child and that makes me contented
not to do anything" suggest a bygone era in which a woman's work
centered around maintaining a home and filling it with children.
still, even though catherine's excessive desire to live
a lovely life may, at times, make her more archetypal than real,
it is unfair to deny her the nuances of her character. although
catherine alludes to her initial days with henry as a period when
she was slightly "crazy," she seems perfectly aware of the fact
that she and henry are, at first, playing an elaborate game of seduction.
rather than being swept off her feet by henry's declarations of
love, she capably draws the line, telling him when she has had enough
for the night or reminding him that their budding love is a lie.
in fact, catherine's resistance holds out much longer than henry's:
even after henry emphatically states that he loves her and that
their lives together will be splendid, catherine exhibits the occasional
doubt, telling him that she is sure that dreadful things await them
and claiming that she fears having a baby because she has never
loved anyone. privy only to what catherine says, not to what she
thinks, the reader is left to explain these infrequent lapses in
her otherwise uncompromised devotion. her premonition of dreadful
things, for instance, may simply be a general alarm about the war-torn
world or residual guilt for loving a man other than the fiance whom
she is mourning as the book opens. while the degree to which catherine
is conflicted remains open to debate, her loyalty to henry does
not. she is a loving, dedicated woman whose desire and capacity
for a redemptive, otherworldly love makes her the inevitable victim
of tragedy.

