


the things they carried
by tim o’brien


the things they carried


first  lieutenant  jimmy  cross  carried  letters  from  a  girl  named
martha,  a  junior  at  mount  sebastian  college  in  new  jersey.  they  were
not love letters, but lieutenant cross was hoping, so he kept them folded
in  plastic  at  the  bottom  of  his  rucksack.  in  the  late  afternoon,  after  a
day's march, he would dig his foxhole, wash his hands under a canteen,
unwrap the letters, hold them with the tips of his fingers, and spend the
last hour of light pretending. he would imagine romantic camping trips
into the white mountains in new hampshire. he would sometimes taste
the  envelope  flaps,  knowing  her  tongue  had  been  there.  more  than
anything, he wanted martha to love him as he loved her, but the letters
were  mostly  chatty,  elusive  on  the  matter  of  love.  she  was  a  virgin,  he
was almost sure. she was an english major at mount sebastian, and she
wrote  beautifully  about  her  professors  and  roommates  and  midterm
exams, about her respect for chaucer and her great affection for virginia
woolf.  she  often  quoted  lines  of  poetry;  she  never  mentioned  the  war,
except  to  say,  jimmy,  take  care  of  yourself.  the  letters  weighed  10
ounces.  they  were  signed  love,  martha,  but  lieutenant  cross
understood that love was only a way of signing and did not mean what
he sometimes pretended it meant. at dusk, he would carefully return the
letters to his rucksack. slowly, a bit distracted, he would get up and move
among  his  men,  checking  the  perimeter,  then  at  full  dark  he  would
return to his hole and watch the night and wonder if martha was a virgin.





the things they carried were largely determined by necessity. among
the necessities or near-necessities were p-38 can openers, pocket knives,
heat  tabs,  wristwatches,  dog  tags,  mosquito  repellent,  chewing  gum,
candy,  cigarettes,  salt  tablets,  packets  of  kool-aid,  lighters,  matches,
sewing  kits,  military  payment  certificates,  c  rations,  and  two  or  three
canteens  of  water.  together,  these  items  weighed  between  15  and  20
pounds,  depending  upon  a  man's  habits  or  rate  of  metabolism.  henry
dobbins,  who  was  a  big  man,  carried  extra  rations;  he  was  especially
fond  of  canned  peaches  in  heavy  syrup  over  pound  cake.  dave  jensen,
who  practiced  field  hygiene,  carried  a  toothbrush,  dental  floss,  and
several hotel-sized bars of soap he'd stolen on r&r in sydney, australia.
ted lavender, who was scared, carried tranquilizers until he was shot in
the head outside the village of than khe in mid-april. by necessity, and
because it was sop, they all carried steel helmets that weighed 5 pounds
including  the  liner  and  camouflage  cover.  they  carried  the  standard
fatigue  jackets  and  trousers.  very  few  carried  underwear.  on  their  feet
they  carried  jungle  boots—2.1  pounds—and  dave  jensen  carried  three
pairs  of  socks  and  a  can  of  dr.  scholl's  foot  powder  as  a  precaution
against  trench  foot.  until  he  was  shot,  ted  lavender  carried  6  or  7
ounces  of  premium  dope,  which  for  him  was  a  necessity.  mitchell
sanders, the rto, carried condoms. norman bowker carried a diary. rat
kiley carried comic books. kiowa, a devout baptist, carried an illustrated
new testament that had been presented to him by his father, who taught
sunday  school  in  oklahoma  city,  oklahoma.  as  a  hedge  against  bad 
times,  however,  kiowa  also  carried  his  grandmother's  distrust  of  the
white  man,  his  grandfather's  old  hunting  hatchet.  necessity  dictated.
because  the  land  was  mined  and  booby-trapped,  it  was  sop  for  each
man to carry a steel-centered, nylon-covered flak jacket, which weighed
6.7  pounds,  but  which  on  hot  days  seemed  much  heavier.  because  you
could  die  so  quickly,  each  man  carried  at  least  one  large  compress
bandage, usually in the helmet band for easy access. because the nights
were  cold,  and  because  the  monsoons  were  wet,  each  carried  a  green
plastic  poncho  that  could  be  used  as  a  raincoat  or  groundsheet  or
makeshift  tent.  with  its  quilted  liner,  the  poncho  weighed  almost  2
pounds,  but  it  was  worth  every  ounce.  in  april,  for  instance,  when  ted
lavender was shot, they used his poncho to wrap him up, then to carry
him  across  the  paddy,  then  to  lift  him  into  the  chopper  that  took  him
away.





they were called legs or grunts.
to carry something was to hump it, as when lieutenant jimmy cross
humped his love for martha up the hills and through the swamps. in its
intransitive  form,  to  hump  meant  to  walk,  or  to  march,  but  it  implied
burdens far beyond the intransitive.

almost everyone humped photographs. in his wallet, lieutenant cross
carried two photographs of martha. the first was a kodacolor snapshot
signed love, though he knew better. she stood against a brick wall. her
eyes were gray and neutral, her lips slightly open as she stared straight-
on at the camera. at night, sometimes, lieutenant cross wondered who
had taken the picture, because he knew she had boyfriends, because he
loved her so much, and because he could see the shadow of the picture-
taker  spreading  out  against  the  brick  wall.  the  second  photograph  had
been clipped from the 1968 mount sebastian yearbook. it was an action
shot—women's volleyball—and martha was bent horizontal to the floor,
reaching,  the  palms  of  her  hands  in  sharp  focus,  the  tongue  taut,  the
expression frank and competitive. there was no visible sweat. she wore
white gym shorts. her legs, he thought, were almost certainly the legs of
a  virgin,  dry  and  without  hair,  the  left  knee  cocked  and  carrying  her
entire  weight,  which  was  just  over  100  pounds.  lieutenant  cross
remembered  touching  that  left  knee.  a  dark  theater,  he  remembered,
and  the  movie  was  bonnie  and  clyde,  and  martha  wore  a  tweed  skirt,
and  during  the  final  scene,  when  he  touched  her  knee,  she  turned  and
looked at him in a sad, sober way that made him pull his hand back, but
he  would  always  remember  the  feel  of  the  tweed  skirt  and  the  knee
beneath it and the sound of the gunfire that killed bonnie and clyde, how
embarrassing it was, how slow and oppressive. he remembered kissing
her  good  night  at  the  dorm  door.  right  then,  he  thought,  he  should've
done something brave. he should've carried her up the stairs to her room
and  tied  her  to  the  bed  and  touched  that  left  knee  all  night  long.  he
should've risked it. whenever he looked at the photographs, he thought
of new things he should've done.


what  they  carried  was  partly  a  function  of  rank,  partly  of  field

specialty.

as  a  first  lieutenant  and  platoon  leader,  jimmy  cross  carried  a
compass,  maps,  code  books,  binoculars,  and  a  .45-caliber  pistol  that



weighed  2.9  pounds  fully  loaded.  he  carried  a  strobe  light  and  the
responsibility for the lives of his men.

as  an  rto,  mitchell  sanders  carried  the  prc-25  radio,  a  killer,  26

pounds with its battery.

as a medic, rat kiley carried a canvas satchel filled with morphine and
plasma and malaria tablets and surgical tape and comic books and all the
things a medic must carry, including m&m's for especially bad wounds,
for a total weight of nearly 20 pounds.

as a big man, therefore a machine gunner, henry dobbins carried the
m-60, which weighed 23 pounds unloaded, but which was almost always
loaded.  in  addition,  dobbins  carried  between  10  and  15  pounds  of
ammunition draped in belts across his chest and shoulders.

as  pfcs  or  spec  4s,  most  of  them  were  common  grunts  and  carried
the  standard  m-16  gas-operated  assault  rifle.  the  weapon  weighed  7.5
pounds  unloaded,  8.2  pounds  with
its  full  20-round  magazine.
depending on numerous factors, such as topography and psychology, the
riflemen  carried  anywhere  from  12  to  20  magazines,  usually  in  cloth
bandoliers,  adding  on  another  8.4  pounds  at  minimum,  14  pounds  at
maximum.  when  it  was  available,  they  also  carried  m-16  maintenance
gear—rods  and  steel  brushes  and  swabs  and  tubes  of  lsa  oil—all  of
which weighed about a pound. among the grunts, some carried the m-79
grenade  launcher,  5.9  pounds  unloaded,  a  reasonably  light  weapon
except for the ammunition, which was heavy. a single round weighed 10
ounces.  the  typical  load  was  25  rounds.  but  ted  lavender,  who  was
scared, carried 34 rounds when he was shot and killed outside than khe,
and he went down under an exceptional burden, more than 20 pounds of
ammunition, plus the flak jacket and helmet and rations and water and
toilet  paper  and  tranquilizers  and  all  the  rest,  plus  the  unweighed  fear.
he was dead weight. there was no twitching or flopping. kiowa, who saw
it  happen,  said  it  was  like  watching  a  rock  fall,  or  a  big  sandbag  or
something—just boom, then down—not  like  the  movies  where  the  dead
guy  rolls  around  and  does  fancy  spins  and  goes  ass  over  teakettle—not
like  that,  kiowa  said,  the  poor  bastard  just  flat-fuck  fell.  boom.  down.
nothing else. it was a bright morning in mid-april. lieutenant cross felt
the pain. he blamed himself. they stripped off lavender's canteens and
ammo,  all  the  heavy  things,  and  rat  kiley  said  the  obvious,  the  guy's
dead, and mitchell sanders used his radio to report one u.s. kia and to
request  a  chopper.  then  they  wrapped  lavender  in  his  poncho.  they



carried him out to a dry paddy, established security, and sat smoking the
dead  man's  dope  until  the  chopper  came.  lieutenant  cross  kept  to
himself. he pictured martha's smooth young face, thinking he loved her
more  than  anything,  more  than  his  men,  and  now  ted  lavender  was
dead  because  he  loved  her  so  much  and  could  not  stop  thinking  about
her. when the dustoff arrived, they carried lavender aboard. afterward
they  burned  than  khe.  they  marched  until  dusk,  then  dug  their  holes,
and that night kiowa kept explaining how you had to be there, how fast it
was, how the poor guy just dropped like so much concrete. boom-down,
he said. like cement.


in  addition  to  the  three  standard  weapons—the  m-60,  m-16,  and  m-
79—they  carried  whatever  presented
itself,  or  whatever  seemed
appropriate as a means of killing or staying alive. they carried catch-as-
catch-can. at various times, in various situations, they carried m-14s and
car-15s and swedish ks and grease guns and captured ak-47s and chi-
coms and rpgs and simonov carbines and black market uzis and .38-
caliber smith & wesson handguns and 66 mm laws and shotguns and
silencers  and  blackjacks  and  bayonets  and  c-4  plastic  explosives.  lee
strunk carried a slingshot; a weapon of last resort, he called it. mitchell
sanders  carried  brass  knuckles.  kiowa  carried  his  grandfather's
feathered  hatchet.  every  third  or  fourth  man  carried  a  claymore
antipersonnel  mine—3.5  pounds  with  its  firing  device.  they  all  carried
fragmentation grenades—14 ounces each. they all carried at least one m-
18  colored  smoke  grenade—24  ounces.  some  carried  cs  or  tear  gas
grenades. some carried white phosphorus grenades. they carried all they
could bear, and then some, including a silent awe for the terrible power
of the things they carried.


in  the  first  week  of  april,  before  lavender  died,  lieutenant  jimmy
cross received a good-luck charm from martha. it was a simple pebble,
an ounce at most. smooth to the touch, it was a milky white color with
flecks  of  orange  and  violet,  oval-shaped,  like  a  miniature  egg.  in  the
accompanying letter, martha wrote that she had found the pebble on the
jersey  shoreline,  precisely  where  the  land  touched  water  at  high  tide,
where things came together but also separated. it was this separate-but-
together quality, she wrote, that had inspired her to pick up the pebble
and  to  carry  it  in  her  breast  pocket  for  several  days,  where  it  seemed



weightless, and then to send it through the mail, by air, as a token of her
truest  feelings  for  him.  lieutenant  cross  found  this  romantic.  but  he
wondered what her truest feelings were, exactly, and what she meant by
separate-but-together. he wondered how the tides and waves had come
into play on that afternoon along the jersey shoreline when martha saw
the  pebble  and  bent  down  to  rescue  it  from  geology.  he  imagined  bare
feet. martha was a poet, with the poet's sensibilities, and her feet would
be  brown  and  bare,  the  toenails  unpainted,  the  eyes  chilly  and  somber
like the ocean in march, and though it was painful, he wondered who had
been  with  her  that  afternoon.  he  imagined  a  pair  of  shadows  moving
along the strip of sand where things came together but also separated. it
was phantom jealousy, he knew, but he couldn't help himself. he loved
her  so  much.  on  the  march,  through  the  hot  days  of  early  april,  he
carried  the  pebble  in  his  mouth,  turning  it  with  his  tongue,  tasting  sea
salt  and  moisture.  his  mind  wandered.  he  had  difficulty  keeping  his
attention on the war. on occasion he would yell at his men to spread out
the  column,  to  keep  their  eyes  open,  but  then  he  would  slip  away  into
daydreams,  just  pretending,  walking  barefoot  along  the  jersey  shore,
with  martha,  carrying  nothing.  he  would  feel  himself  rising.  sun  and
waves and gentle winds, all love and lightness.


what they carried varied by mission.
when  a  mission  took  them  to  the  mountains,  they  carried  mosquito

netting, machetes, canvas tarps, and extra bug juice.

if a mission seemed especially hazardous, or if it involved a place they
knew  to  be  bad,  they  carried  everything  they  could.  in  certain  heavily
mined  aos,  where  the  land  was  dense  with  toe  poppers  and  bouncing
betties,  they  took  turns  humping  a  28-pound  mine  detector.  with  its
headphones  and  big  sensing  plate,  the  equipment  was  a  stress  on  the
lower  back  and  shoulders,  awkward  to  handle,  often  useless  because  of
the  shrapnel  in  the  earth,  but  they  carried  it  anyway,  partly  for  safety,
partly for the illusion of safety.

on ambush, or other night missions, they carried peculiar little odds
and  ends.  kiowa  always  took  along  his  new  testament  and  a  pair  of
moccasins for silence. dave jensen carried night-sight vitamins high in
carotene.  lee  strunk  carried  his  slingshot;  ammo,  he  claimed,  would
never be a problem. rat kiley carried brandy and m&m's candy. until he
was  shot,  ted  lavender  carried  the  starlight  scope,  which  weighed  6.3



pounds  with  its  aluminum  carrying  case.  henry  dobbins  carried  his
girlfriend's pantyhose wrapped around his neck as a comforter. they all
carried ghosts. when dark came, they would move out single file across
the  meadows  and  paddies  to  their  ambush  coordinates,  where  they
would  quietly  set  up  the  claymores  and  lie  down  and  spend  the  night
waiting.

other  missions  were  more  complicated  and  required  special
equipment. in mid-april, it was their mission to search out and destroy
the elaborate tunnel complexes in the than khe area south of chu lai.
to  blow  the  tunnels,  they  carried  one-pound  blocks  of  pentrite  high
explosives, four blocks to a man, 68 pounds in all. they carried wiring,
detonators, and battery-powered clackers. dave jensen carried earplugs.
most  often,  before  blowing  the  tunnels,  they  were  ordered  by  higher
command  to  search  them,  which  was  considered  bad  news,  but  by  and
large  they  just  shrugged  and  carried  out  orders.  because  he  was  a  big
man,  henry  dobbins  was  excused  from  tunnel  duty.  the  others  would
draw numbers. before lavender died there were 17 men in the platoon,
and  whoever  drew  the  number  17  would  strip  off  his  gear  and  crawl  in
headfirst with a flashlight and lieutenant cross's .45-caliber pistol. the
rest of them would fan out as security. they would sit down or kneel, not
facing  the  hole,  listening  to  the  ground  beneath  them,  imagining
cobwebs  and  ghosts,  whatever  was  down  there—the  tunnel  walls
squeezing  in—how  the  flashlight  seemed  impossibly  heavy  in  the  hand
and how it was tunnel vision in the very strictest sense, compression in
all  ways,  even  time,  and  how  you  had  to  wiggle  in—ass  and  elbows—a
swallowed-up  feeling—and  how  you  found  yourself  worrying  about  odd
things:  will  your  flashlight  go  dead?  do  rats  carry  rabies?  if  you
screamed, how far would the sound carry? would your buddies hear it?
would they have the courage to drag you out? in some respects, though
not many, the waiting was worse than the tunnel itself. imagination was
a killer.

on  april  16,  when  lee  strunk  drew  the  number  17,  he  laughed  and
muttered something and went down quickly. the morning was hot and
very  still.  not  good,  kiowa  said.  he  looked  at  the  tunnel  opening,  then
out across a dry paddy toward the village of than khe. nothing moved.
no clouds or birds or people. as they waited, the men smoked and drank
kool-aid,  not  talking  much,  feeling  sympathy  for  lee  strunk  but  also
feeling the luck of the draw. you win some, you lose some, said mitchell



sanders,  and  sometimes  you  settle  for  a  rain  check.  it  was  a  tired  line
and no one laughed.

henry  dobbins  ate  a  tropical  chocolate  bar.  ted  lavender  popped  a

tranquilizer and went off to pee.

after  five  minutes,  lieutenant  jimmy  cross  moved  to  the  tunnel,
leaned down, and examined the darkness. trouble, he thought—a cave-in
maybe.  and  then  suddenly,  without  willing  it,  he  was  thinking  about
martha. the stresses and fractures, the quick collapse, the two of them
buried  alive  under  all  that  weight.  dense,  crushing  love.  kneeling,
watching the hole, he tried to concentrate on lee strunk and the war, all
the  dangers,  but  his  love  was  too  much  for  him,  he  felt  paralyzed,  he
wanted  to  sleep  inside  her  lungs  and  breathe  her  blood  and  be
smothered. he wanted her to be a virgin and not a virgin, all at once. he
wanted  to  know  her.  intimate  secrets:  why  poetry?  why  so  sad?  why
that grayness in her eyes? why so alone? not lonely, just alone—riding
her  bike  across  campus  or  sitting  off  by  herself  in  the  cafeteria—even
dancing, she danced alone—and it was the aloneness that filled him with
love. he remembered telling her that one evening. how she nodded and
looked  away.  and  how,  later,  when  he  kissed  her,  she  received  the  kiss
without returning it, her eyes wide open, not afraid, not a virgin's eyes,
just flat and uninvolved.

lieutenant  cross  gazed  at  the  tunnel.  but  he  was  not  there.  he  was
buried with martha under the white sand at the jersey shore. they were
pressed  together,  and  the  pebble  in  his  mouth  was  her  tongue.  he  was
smiling.  vaguely,  he  was  aware  of  how  quiet  the  day  was,  the  sullen
paddies,  yet  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  worry  about  matters  of
security. he was beyond that. he was just a kid at war, in love. he was
twenty-four years old. he couldn't help it.

a  few  moments  later  lee  strunk  crawled  out  of  the  tunnel.  he  came
up grinning, filthy but alive. lieutenant cross nodded and closed his eyes
while the others clapped strunk on the back and made jokes about rising
from the dead.

worms, rat kiley said. right out of the grave. fuckin' zombie.
the men laughed. they all felt great relief.
spook city, said mitchell sanders.
lee  strunk  made  a  funny  ghost  sound,  a  kind  of  moaning,  yet  very
happy,  and  right  then,  when  strunk  made  that  high  happy  moaning



sound, when he went ahhooooo, right then ted lavender was shot in the
head on his way back from peeing. he lay with his mouth open. the teeth
were broken. there was a swollen black bruise under his left eye.

the cheekbone was gone. oh shit, rat kiley said, the guy's dead. the
guy's  dead,  he  kept  saying,  which  seemed  profound—the  guy's  dead.  i
mean really.


the  things  they  carried  were  determined  to  some  extent  by
superstition. lieutenant cross carried his good-luck pebble. dave jensen
carried a rabbit's foot. norman bowker, otherwise a very gentle person,
carried  a  thumb  that  had  been  presented  to  him  as  a  gift  by  mitchell
sanders. the thumb was dark brown, rubbery to the touch, and weighed
4 ounces at most. it had been cut from a vc corpse, a boy of fifteen or
sixteen.  they'd  found  him  at  the  bottom  of  an  irrigation  ditch,  badly
burned,  flies  in  his  mouth  and  eyes.  the  boy  wore  black  shorts  and
sandals. at the time of his death he had been carrying a pouch of rice, a
rifle, and three magazines of ammunition.

you want my opinion, mitchell sanders said, there's a definite moral

here.

he put his hand on the dead boy's wrist. he was quiet for a time, as if
counting a pulse, then he patted the stomach, almost affectionately, and
used kiowa's hunting hatchet to remove the thumb.

henry dobbins asked what the moral was.
moral?
you know. moral.
sanders  wrapped  the  thumb  in  toilet  paper  and  handed  it  across  to
norman bowker. there was no blood. smiling, he kicked the boy's head,
watched  the  flies  scatter,  and  said,  it's  like  with  that  old  tv  show—
paladin. have gun, will travel.

henry dobbins thought about it.
yeah, well, he finally said. i don't see no moral.
there it is, man.
fuck off.



they  carried  uso  stationery  and  pencils  and  pens.  they  carried
sterno, safety pins, trip flares, signal flares, spools of wire, razor blades,



chewing  tobacco,  liberated  joss  sticks  and  statuettes  of  the  smiling
buddha,  candles,  grease  pencils,  the  stars  and  stripes,  fingernail
clippers,  psy  ops  leaflets,  bush  hats,  bolos,  and  much  more.  twice  a
week,  when  the  resupply  choppers  came  in,  they  carried  hot  chow  in
green mermite cans and large canvas bags filled with iced beer and soda
pop. they carried plastic water containers, each with a 2-gallon capacity.
mitchell  sanders  carried  a  set  of  starched  tiger  fatigues  for  special
occasions.  henry  dobbins  carried  black  flag  insecticide.  dave  jensen
carried empty sandbags that could be filled at night for added protection.
lee strunk carried tanning lotion. some things they carried in common.
taking  turns,  they  carried  the  big  prc-77  scrambler  radio,  which
weighed 30 pounds with its battery. they shared the weight of memory.
they took up what others could no longer bear. often, they carried each
other, the wounded or weak. they carried infections. they carried chess
sets,  basketballs,  vietnamese-english  dictionaries,  insignia  of  rank,
bronze stars and purple hearts, plastic cards imprinted with the code of
conduct.  they  carried  diseases,  among  them  malaria  and  dysentery.
they carried lice and ringworm and leeches and paddy algae and various
rots  and  molds.  they  carried  the  land  itself—vietnam,  the  place,  the
soil—a  powdery  orange-red  dust  that  covered  their  boots  and  fatigues
and  faces.  they  carried  the  sky.  the  whole  atmosphere,  they  carried  it,
the humidity, the monsoons, the stink of fungus and decay, all of it, they
carried gravity. they moved like mules. by daylight they took sniper fire,
at night they were mortared, but it was not battle, it was just the endless
march,  village  to  village,  without  purpose,  nothing  won  or  lost.  they
marched for the sake of the march. they plodded along slowly, dumbly,
leaning forward against the heat, unthinking, all blood and bone, simple
grunts, soldiering with their legs, toiling up the hills and down into the
paddies and across the rivers and up again and down, just humping, one
step and then the next and then another, but no volition, no will, because
it  was  automatic,  it  was  anatomy,  and  the  war  was  entirely  a  matter  of
posture and carriage, the hump was everything, a kind of inertia, a kind
of emptiness, a dullness of desire and intellect and conscience and hope
and  human  sensibility.  their  principles  were  in  their  feet.  their
calculations  were  biological.  they  had  no  sense  of  strategy  or  mission.
they searched the villages without knowing what to look for, not caring,
kicking over jars of rice, frisking children and old men, blowing tunnels,
sometimes setting fires and sometimes not, then forming up and moving
on to the next village, then other villages, where it would always be the



same. they carried their own lives. the pressures were enormous. in the
heat  of  early  afternoon,  they  would  remove  their  helmets  and  flak
jackets,  walking  bare,  which  was  dangerous  but  which  helped  ease  the
strain. they would often discard things along the route of march. purely
for  comfort,  they  would  throw  away  rations,  blow  their  claymores  and
grenades,  no  matter,  because  by  nightfall  the  resupply  choppers  would
arrive  with  more  of  the  same,  then  a  day  or  two  later  still  more,  fresh
watermelons  and  crates  of  ammunition  and  sunglasses  and  woolen
sweaters—the resources were stunning—sparklers for the fourth of july,
colored eggs for easter—it was the great american war chest—the fruits
of science, the smokestacks, the canneries, the arsenals at hartford, the
minnesota forests, the machine shops, the vast fields of corn and wheat—
they  carried  like  freight  trains;  they  carried  it  on  their  backs  and
shoulders—and for all the ambiguities of vietnam, all the mysteries and
unknowns, there was at least the single abiding certainty that they would
never be at a loss for things to carry.


after  the  chopper  took  lavender  away,  lieutenant  jimmy  cross  led
his men into the village of than khe. they burned everything. they shot
chickens  and  dogs,  they  trashed  the  village  well,  they  called  in  artillery
and watched the wreckage, then they marched for several hours through
the  hot  afternoon,  and  then  at  dusk,  while  kiowa  explained  how
lavender died, lieutenant cross found himself trembling.

he  tried  not  to  cry.  with  his  entrenching  tool,  which  weighed  5

pounds, he began digging a hole in the earth.

he felt shame. he hated himself. he had loved martha more than his
men,  and  as  a  consequence  lavender  was  now  dead,  and  this  was
something he would have to carry like a stone in his stomach for the rest
of the war.

all  he  could  do  was  dig.  he  used  his  entrenching  tool  like  an  ax,
slashing, feeling both love and hate, and then later, when it was full dark,
he sat at the bottom of his foxhole and wept. it went on for a long while.
in part, he was grieving for ted lavender, but mostly it was for martha,
and for himself, because she belonged to another world, which was not
quite  real,  and  because  she  was  a  junior  at  mount  sebastian  college  in
new jersey, a poet and a virgin and uninvolved, and because he realized
she did not love him and never would.




like  cement,  kiowa  whispered  in  the  dark.  i  swear  to  god—boom,

down. not a word.

i've heard this, said norman bowker.
a pisser, you know? still zipping himself up. zapped while zipping.
all right, fine. that's enough.
yeah, but you had to see it, the guy just—
i heard, man. cement. so why not shut the fuck up?
kiowa  shook  his  head  sadly  and  glanced  over  at  the  hole  where
lieutenant  jimmy  cross  sat  watching  the  night.  the  air  was  thick  and
wet.  a  warm  dense  fog  had  settled  over  the  paddies  and  there  was  the
stillness that precedes rain.

after a time kiowa sighed.
one thing for sure, he said. the lieutenant's in some deep hurt. i mean
that crying jag—the way he was carrying on—it wasn't fake or anything, it
was real heavy-duty hurt. the man cares.

sure, norman bowker said.
say what you want, the man does care.
we all got problems.
not lavender.
no, i guess not, bowker said. do me a favor, though.
shut up?
that's a smart indian. shut up.
shrugging, kiowa pulled off his boots. he wanted to say more, just to
lighten  up  his  sleep,  but  instead  he  opened  his  new  testament  and
arranged  it  beneath  his  head  as  a  pillow.  the  fog  made  things  seem
hollow  and  unattached.  he  tried  not  to  think  about  ted  lavender,  but
then he was thinking how fast it was, no drama, down and dead, and how
it  was  hard  to  feel  anything  except  surprise.  it  seemed  unchristian.  he
wished he could find some great sadness, or even anger, but the emotion
wasn't there and he couldn't make it happen. mostly he felt pleased to be
alive.  he  liked  the  smell  of  the  new  testament  under  his  cheek,  the
leather  and  ink  and  paper  and  glue,  whatever  the  chemicals  were.  he
liked  hearing  the  sounds  of  night.  even  his  fatigue,  it  felt  fine,  the  stiff
muscles and the prickly awareness of his own body, a floating feeling. he
enjoyed not being dead. lying there, kiowa admired lieutenant jimmy
cross's capacity for grief. he wanted to share the man's pain, he wanted



to  care  as  jimmy  cross  cared.  and  yet  when  he  closed  his  eyes,  all  he
could  think  was  boom-down,  and  all  he  could  feel  was  the  pleasure  of
having his boots off and the fog curling in around him and the damp soil
and the bible smells and the plush comfort of night.

after a moment norman bowker sat up in the dark.
what the hell, he said. you want to talk, talk. tell it to me.
forget it.
no, man, go on. one thing i hate, it's a silent indian.



for the most part they carried themselves with poise, a kind of dignity.
now and then, however, there were times of panic, when they squealed
or wanted to squeal but couldn't, when they twitched and made moaning
sounds and covered their heads and said dear jesus and flopped around
on the earth and fired their weapons blindly and cringed and sobbed and
begged for the noise to stop and went wild and made stupid promises to
themselves and to god and to their mothers and fathers, hoping not to
die.  in  different  ways,  it  happened  to  all  of  them.  afterward,  when  the
firing  ended,  they  would  blink  and  peek  up.  they  would  touch  their
bodies,  feeling  shame,  then  quickly  hiding  it.  they  would  force
themselves  to  stand.  as  if  in  slow  motion,  frame  by  frame,  the  world
would  take  on  the  old  logic—absolute  silence,  then  the  wind,  then
sunlight,  then  voices.  it  was  the  burden  of  being  alive.  awkwardly,  the
men  would  reassemble  themselves,  first  in  private,  then  in  groups,
becoming soldiers again. they would repair the leaks in their eyes. they
would check for casualties, call in dustoffs, light cigarettes, try to smile,
clear  their  throats  and  spit  and  begin  cleaning  their  weapons.  after  a
time  someone  would  shake  his  head  and  say,  no  lie,  i  almost  shit  my
pants, and someone else would laugh, which meant it was bad, yes, but
the  guy  had  obviously  not  shit  his  pants,  it  wasn't  that  bad,  and  in  any
case  nobody  would  ever  do  such  a  thing  and  then  go  ahead  and  talk
about it. they would squint into the dense, oppressive sunlight. for a few
moments, perhaps, they would fall silent, lighting a joint and tracking its
passage  from  man  to  man,  inhaling,  holding  in  the  humiliation.  scary
stuff, one of them might say. but then someone else would grin or flick
his  eyebrows  and  say,  roger-dodger,  almost  cut  me  a  new  asshole,
almost.

there were numerous such poses. some carried themselves with a sort
of  wistful  resignation,  others  with  pride  or  stiff  soldierly  discipline  or



good humor or macho zeal. they were afraid of dying but they were even
more afraid to show it.

they found jokes to tell.
they used a hard vocabulary to contain the terrible softness. greased
they'd  say.  offed,  lit  up,  zapped  while  zipping.  it  wasn't  cruelty,  just
stage  presence.  they  were  actors.  when  someone  died,  it  wasn't  quite
dying, because in a curious way it seemed scripted, and because they had
their  lines  mostly  memorized,  irony  mixed  with  tragedy,  and  because
they  called  it  by  other  names,  as  if  to  encyst  and  destroy  the  reality  of
death itself. they kicked corpses. they cut off thumbs. they talked grunt
lingo.  they  told  stories  about  ted  lavender's  supply  of  tranquilizers,
how the poor guy didn't feel a thing, how incredibly tranquil he was.

there's a moral here, said mitchell sanders.
they  were  waiting  for  lavender's  chopper,  smoking  the  dead  man's

dope.

the moral's pretty obvious, sanders said, and winked. stay away from

drugs. no joke, they'll ruin your day every time.

cute, said henry dobbins.
mind  blower,  get  it?  talk  about  wiggy.  nothing  left,  just  blood  and

brains.

they made themselves laugh.
there  it  is,  they'd  say.  over  and  over—there  it  is,  my  friend,  there  it
is—as if the repetition itself were an act of poise, a balance between crazy
and  almost  crazy,  knowing  without  going,  there  it  is,  which  meant  be
cool,  let  it  ride,  because  oh  yeah,  man,  you  can't  change  what  can't  be
changed, there it is, there it absolutely and positively and fucking well is.

they were tough.
they  carried  all  the  emotional  baggage  of  men  who  might  die.  grief,
terror,  love,  longing—these  were  intangibles,  but  the  intangibles  had
their  own  mass  and  specific  gravity,  they  had  tangible  weight.  they
carried  shameful  memories.  they  carried  the  common  secret  of
cowardice barely restrained, the instinct to run or freeze or hide, and in
many  respects  this  was  the  heaviest  burden of all, for it could never be
put down, it required perfect balance and perfect posture. they carried
their reputations. they carried the soldier's greatest fear, which was the
fear  of  blushing.  men  killed,  and  died,  because  they  were  embarrassed
not  to.  it  was  what  had  brought  them  to  the  war  in  the  first  place,



nothing positive, no dreams of glory or honor, just to avoid the blush of
dishonor.  they  died  so  as  not  to  die  of  embarrassment.  they  crawled
into  tunnels  and  walked  point  and  advanced  under  fire.  each  morning,
despite  the  unknowns,  they  made  their  legs  move.  they  endured.  they
kept humping. they did not submit to the obvious alternative, which was
simply to close the eyes and fall. so easy, really. go limp and tumble to
the  ground  and  let  the  muscles  unwind  and  not  speak  and  not  budge
until  your  buddies  picked  you  up  and  lifted  you  into  the  chopper  that
would roar and dip its nose and carry you off to the world. a mere matter
of falling, yet no one ever fell. it was not courage, exactly; the object was
not valor. rather, they were too frightened to be cowards.

by and large they carried these things inside, maintaining the masks of
composure. they sneered at sick call. they spoke bitterly about guys who
had  found  release  by  shooting  off  their  own  toes  or  fingers.  pussies,
they'd say. candy-asses. it was fierce, mocking talk, with only a trace of
envy or awe, but even so the image played itself out behind their eyes.

they  imagined  the  muzzle  against  flesh.  so  easy:  squeeze  the  trigger
and blow away a toe. they imagined it. they imagined the quick, sweet
pain, then the evacuation to japan, then a hospital with warm beds and
cute geisha nurses.

and they dreamed of freedom birds.
at  night,  on  guard,  staring  into  the  dark,  they  were  carried  away  by
jumbo  jets.  they  felt  the  rush  of  takeoff.  gone!  they  yelled.  and  then
velocity—wings and engines—a smiling stewardess—but it was more than
a plane, it was a real bird, a big sleek silver bird with feathers and talons
and  high  screeching.  they  were  flying.  the  weights  fell  off;  there  was
nothing to bear. they laughed and held on tight, feeling the cold slap of
wind  and  altitude,  soaring,  thinking  it's  over,  i'm  gone!—they  were
naked, they were light and free—it was all lightness, bright and fast and
buoyant, light as light, a helium buzz in the brain, a giddy bubbling in the
lungs  as  they  were  taken  up  over  the  clouds  and  the  war,  beyond  duty,
beyond gravity and mortification and global entanglements—sin loi! they
yelled. i'm sorry, motherfuckers, but i'm out of it, i'm goofed, i'm on a
space cruise, i'm gone!—and  it  was  a  restful,  unencumbered  sensation,
just  riding  the  light  waves,  sailing  that  big  silver  freedom  bird  over  the
mountains and oceans, over america, over the farms and great sleeping
cities and cemeteries and highways and the golden arches of mcdonald's,
it was flight, a kind of fleeing, a kind of falling, falling higher and higher,



spinning  off  the  edge  of  the  earth  and  beyond  the  sun  and  through  the
vast, silent vacuum where there were no burdens and where everything
weighed  exactly  nothing—gone!  they  screamed.  i'm  sorry  but  i'm
gone!—and so at night, not quite dreaming, they gave themselves over to
lightness, they were carried, they were purely borne.


on  the  morning  after  ted  lavender  died,  first  lieutenant  jimmy
cross crouched at the bottom of his foxhole and burned martha's letters.
then  he  burned  the  two  photographs.  there  was  a  steady  rain  falling,
which made it difficult, but he used heat tabs and sterno to build a small
fire,  screening  it  with  his  body,  holding  the  photographs  over  the  tight
blue flame with the tips of his fingers.

he realized it was only a gesture. stupid, he thought. sentimental, too,

but mostly just stupid.

lavender was dead. you couldn't burn the blame.
besides,  the  letters  were  in  his  head.  and  even  now,  without
photographs, lieutenant cross could see martha playing volleyball in her
white  gym  shorts  and  yellow  t-shirt.  he  could  see  her  moving  in  the
rain.

when  the  fire  died  out,  lieutenant  cross  pulled  his  poncho  over  his

shoulders and ate breakfast from a can.

there was no great mystery, he decided.
in those burned letters martha had never mentioned the war, except
to say, jimmy, take care of yourself. she wasn't involved. she signed the
letters love, but it wasn't love, and all the fine lines and technicalities did
not matter. virginity was no longer an issue. he hated her. yes, he did.
he hated her. love, too, but it was a hard, hating kind of love.

the  morning  came  up  wet  and  blurry.  everything  seemed  part  of

everything else, the fog and martha and the deepening rain.

he was a soldier, after all.
half smiling, lieutenant jimmy cross took out his maps. he shook his
head  hard,  as  if  to  clear  it,  then  bent  forward  and  began  planning  the
day's march. in ten minutes, or maybe twenty, he would rouse the men
and  they  would  pack  up  and  head  west,  where  the  maps  showed  the
country  to  be  green  and  inviting.  they  would  do  what  they  had  always
done.  the  rain  might  add  some  weight,  but  otherwise  it  would  be  one
more day layered upon all the other days.



he was realistic about it. there was that new hardness in his stomach.

he loved her but he hated her.

no more fantasies, he told himself.
henceforth, when he thought about martha, it would be only to think
that she belonged elsewhere. he would shut down the daydreams. this
was  not  mount  sebastian,  it  was  another  world,  where  there  were  no
pretty  poems  or  midterm  exams,  a  place  where  men  died  because  of
carelessness and gross stupidity. kiowa was right. boom-down, and you
were dead, never partly dead.

briefly,  in  the  rain,  lieutenant  cross  saw  martha's  gray  eyes  gazing

back at him. he understood.

it was very sad, he thought. the things men carried inside. the things

men did or felt they had to do.

he almost nodded at her, but didn't.
instead he went back to his maps. he was now determined to perform
his  duties  firmly  and  without  negligence.  it  wouldn't  help  lavender,  he
knew that, but from this point on he would comport himself as an officer.
he would dispose of his good-luck pebble. swallow it, maybe, or use lee
strunk's slingshot, or just drop it along the trail. on the march he would
impose  strict  field  discipline.  he  would  be  careful  to  send  out  flank
security, to prevent straggling or bunching up, to keep his troops moving
at the proper pace  and at the proper interval. he would insist on clean
weapons.  he  would  confiscate  the  remainder  of  lavender's  dope.  later
in the day, perhaps, he would call the men together and speak to them
plainly.  he  would  accept  the  blame  for  what  had  happened  to  ted
lavender. he would be a man about it. he would look them in the eyes,
keeping  his  chin  level,  and  he  would  issue  the  new  sops  in  a  calm,
impersonal  tone  of  voice,  a  lieutenant's  voice,  leaving  no  room  for
argument or discussion. commencing immediately, he'd tell them, they
would  no  longer  abandon  equipment  along  the  route  of  march.  they
would police up their acts. they would get their shit together, and keep it
together, and maintain it neatly and in good working order.

he  would  not  tolerate  laxity.  he  would  show  strength,  distancing

himself.

among  the  men  there  would  be  grumbling,  of  course,  and  maybe
worse, because their days would seem longer and their loads heavier, but
lieutenant jimmy cross reminded himself that his obligation was not to



be  loved  but  to  lead.  he  would  dispense  with  love;  it  was  not  now  a
factor. and if anyone quarreled or complained, he would simply tighten
his  lips  and  arrange  his  shoulders  in  the  correct  command  posture.  he
might  give  a  curt  little  nod.  or  he  might  not.  he  might  just  shrug  and
say,  carry  on,  then  they  would  saddle  up  and  form  into  a  column  and
move out toward the villages west of than khe.

love


many years after the war jimmy cross came to visit me at my home in
massachusetts, and for a full day we drank coffee and smoked cigarettes
and  talked  about  everything  we  had  seen  and  done  so  long  ago,  all  the
things  we  still  carried  through  our  lives.  spread  out  across  the  kitchen
table were maybe a hundred old photographs. there were pictures of rat
kiley and kiowa and mitchell sanders, all of us, the faces incredibly soft
and young. at one point, i remember, we paused over a snapshot of ted
lavender, and after a while jimmy rubbed his eyes and said he'd never
forgiven himself for lavender's death. it was something that would never
go away, he said quietly, and i nodded and told him i felt the same about
certain things. then for a long time neither of us could think of much to
say. the thing to do, we decided, was to forget the coffee and switch to
gin,  which  improved  the  mood,  and  not  much  later  we  were  laughing
about some of the craziness that used to go on. the way henry dobbins
carried  his  girlfriend's  pantyhose  around  his  neck  like  a  comforter.
kiowa's  moccasins  and  hunting  hatchet.  rat  kiley's  comic  books.  by
midnight we were both a little high, and i decided there was no harm in
asking  about  martha.  i'm  not  sure  how  i  phrased  it—just  a  general
question—but jimmy cross looked up in surprise. "you writer types," he
said,  "you've  got  long  memories."  then  he  smiled  and  excused  himself
and  went  up  to  the  guest  room  and  came  back  with  a  small  framed
photograph.  it  was  the  volleyball  shot:  martha  bent  horizontal  to  the
floor, reaching, the palms of her hands in sharp focus.

"remember this?" he said.
i nodded and told him i was surprised. i thought he'd burned it.
jimmy kept smiling. for a while he stared down at the photograph, his
eyes  very  bright,  then  he  shrugged  and  said,  "well,  i  did—i  burned  it.



after lavender died, i couldn't . . . this is a new one. martha gave it to
me herself."

they'd  run  into  each  other,  he  said,  at  a  college  reunion  in  1979.
nothing had changed. he still loved her. for eight or nine hours, he said,
they spent most of their time together. there was a banquet, and then a
dance, and then afterward they took a walk across the campus and talked
about  their  lives.  martha  was  a  lutheran  missionary  now.  a  trained
nurse,  although  nursing  wasn't  the  point,  and  she  had  done  service  in
ethiopia  and  guatemala  and  mexico.  she  had  never  married,  she  said,
and probably never would. she didn't know why. but as she said this, her
eyes  seemed  to  slide  sideways,  and  it  occurred  to  him  that  there  were
things about her he would never know. her eyes were gray and neutral.
later, when he took her hand, there was no pressure in return, and later
still,  when  he  told  her  he  still  loved  her,  she  kept  walking  and  didn't
answer and then after several minutes looked at her wristwatch and said
it  was  getting  late.  he  walked  her  back  to  the  dormitory.  for  a  few
moments he considered asking her to his room, but instead he laughed
and told her how back in college he'd almost done something very brave.
it was after seeing bonnie and clyde, he said, and on this same spot he'd
almost picked her up and carried her to his room and tied her to the bed
and put his hand on her knee and just held it there all night long. it came
close, he told her—he'd almost done it. martha shut her eyes. she crossed
her  arms  at  her  chest,  as  if  suddenly  cold,  rocking  slightly,  then  after  a
time  she  looked  at  him  and  said  she  was  glad  he  hadn't  tried  it.  she
didn't  understand  how  men  could  do  those  things.  what  things?  he
asked, and martha said, the things men do. then he nodded. it began to
form. oh, he said, those things. at breakfast the next morning she told
him  she  was  sorry.  she  explained  that  there  was  nothing  she  could  do
about it, and he said he understood, and then she laughed and gave him
the picture and told him not to burn this one up.

jimmy shook his head. "it doesn't matter," he finally said. "i love her."
for the rest of his visit i steered the conversation away from martha.
at the end, though, as we were walking out to his car, i told him that i'd
like to write a story about some of this. jimmy thought it over and then
gave me a little smile. "why not?" he said. "maybe she'll read it and come
begging. there's always hope, right?"

"right," i said.



he got into his car and rolled down the window. "make me out to be a
good guy, okay? brave and handsome, all that stuff. best platoon leader
ever."  he  hesitated  for  a  second.  "and  do  me  a  favor.  don't  mention
anything about—"

"no," i said, "i won't."


spin


the war wasn't all terror and violence.
sometimes things could almost get sweet. for instance, i remember a
little boy with a plastic leg. i remember how he hopped over to azar and
asked  for  a  chocolate  bar—"gi  number  one,"  the  kid  said—and  azar
laughed  and  handed  over  the  chocolate.  when  the  boy  hopped  away,
azar  clucked  his  tongue  and  said,  "war's  a  bitch."  he  shook  his  head
sadly. "one leg, for chrissake. some poor fucker ran out of ammo."


i  remember  mitchell  sanders  sitting  quietly  in  the  shade  of  an  old
banyan tree. he was using a thumbnail to pry off the body lice, working
slowly,  carefully  depositing  the  lice  in  a  blue  uso  envelope.  his  eyes
were tired. it had been a long two weeks in the bush. after an hour or so
he sealed up the envelope, wrote free in the upper right-hand corner,
and addressed it to his draft board in ohio.

on  occasions  the  war  was  like  a  ping-pong  ball.  you  could  put  fancy

spin on it, you could make it dance.


i  remember  norman  bowker  and  henry  dobbins  playing  checkers
every  evening  before  dark.  it  was  a  ritual  for  them.  they  would  dig  a
foxhole and get the board out and play long, silent games as the sky went
from  pink  to  purple.  the  rest  of  us  would  sometimes  stop  by  to  watch.
there was something restful about it, something orderly and reassuring.
there  were  red  checkers  and  black  checkers.  the  playing  field  was  laid
out in a strict grid, no tunnels or mountains or jungles. you knew where
you  stood.  you  knew  the  score.  the  pieces  were  out  on  the  board,  the
enemy  was  visible,  you  could  watch  the  tactics  unfolding  into  larger
strategies. there was a winner and a loser. there were rules.




i'm forty-three years old, and a writer now, and the war has been over
for a long while. much of it is hard to remember. i sit at this typewriter
and  stare  through  my  words  and  watch  kiowa  sinking  into  the  deep
muck of a shit field, or curt lemon hanging in pieces from a tree, and as
i  write  about  these  things,  the  remembering  is  turned  into  a  kind  of
rehappening.  kiowa  yells  at  me.  curt  lemon  steps  from  the  shade  into
bright sunlight, his face brown and shining, and then he soars into a tree.
the  bad  stuff  never  stops  happening:  it  lives  in  its  own  dimension,
replaying itself over and over.

but the war wasn't all that way.



like when ted lavender went too heavy on the tranquilizers. "how's
the  war  today?"  somebody  would  say,  and  ted  lavender  would  give  a
soft, spacey smile and say, "mellow, man. we got ourselves a nice mellow
war today."


and like the time we enlisted an old poppa-san to guide us through the
mine  fields  out  on  the  batangan  peninsula.  the  old  guy  walked  with  a
limp, slow and stooped over, but he knew where the safe spots were and
where you had to be careful and where even if you were careful you could
end  up  like  popcorn.  he  had  a  tightrope  walker's  feel  for  the  land
beneath  him—its  surface  tension,  the  give  and  take  of  things.  each
morning we'd form up in a long column, the old poppa-san out front, and
for  the  whole  day  we'd  troop  along  after  him,  tracing  his  footsteps,
playing an exact and ruthless game of follow the leader. rat kiley made
up a rhyme that caught on, and we'd all be chanting it together: step out
of line, hit a mine; follow the dink, you're in the pink. all around us, the
place  was  littered  with  bouncing  betties  and  toe  poppers  and  booby-
trapped  artillery  rounds,  but  in  those  five  days  on  the  batangan
peninsula nobody got hurt. we all learned to love the old man.

it  was  a  sad  scene  when  the  choppers  came  to  take  us  away.  jimmy
cross  gave  the  old  poppa-san  a  hug.  mitchell  sanders  and  lee  strunk
loaded him up with boxes of c rations.

there were actually tears in the old guy's eyes. "follow dink," he said

to each of us, "you go pink."




if you weren't humping, you were waiting. i remember the monotony.
digging  foxholes.  slapping  mosquitoes.  the  sun  and  the  heat  and  the
endless  paddies.  even  in  the  deep  bush,  where  you  could  die  in  any
number of ways, the war was nakedly and aggressively boring. but it was
a  strange  boredom.  it  was  boredom  with  a  twist,  the  kind  of  boredom
that caused stomach disorders. you'd be sitting at the top of a high hill,
the flat paddies stretching out below, and the day would be calm and hot
and utterly vacant, and you'd feel the boredom dripping inside you like a
leaky faucet, except it wasn't water, it was a sort of acid, and with each
little droplet you'd feel the stuff eating away at important organs. you'd
try to relax. you'd uncurl your fists and let your thoughts go. well, you'd
think, this isn't so bad. and right then you'd hear gunfire behind you and
your  nuts  would  fly  up  into  your  throat  and  you'd  be  squealing  pig
squeals. that kind of boredom.


i feel guilty sometimes. forty-three years old and i'm still writing war
stories.  my  daughter  kathleen  tells  me  it's  an  obsession,  that  i  should
write about a little girl who finds a million dollars and spends it all on a
shetland pony. in a way, i guess, she's right: i should forget it. but the
thing about remembering is that you don't forget. you take your material
where  you  find  it,  which  is  in  your  life,  at  the  intersection  of  past  and
present. the memory-traffic feeds into a rotary up on your head, where it
goes in circles for a while, then pretty soon imagination flows in and the
traffic  merges  and  shoots  off  down  a  thousand  different  streets.  as  a
writer, all you can do is pick a street and go for the ride, putting things
down as they come at you. that's the real obsession. all those stories.


not  bloody  stories,  necessarily.  happy  stories,  too,  and  even  a  few

peace stories.


here's a quick peace story:
a guy goes awol. shacks up in danang with a red cross nurse. it's a
great  time—the  nurse  loves  him  to  death—the  guy  gets  whatever  he
wants whenever he wants it. the war's over, he thinks. just nookie and
new angles. but then one day he rejoins his unit in the bush. can't wait to
get back into action. finally one of his buddies asks what happened with
the nurse, why so hot for combat, and the guy says, "all that peace, man,
it felt so good it hurt. i want to hurt it back."





i remember mitchell sanders smiling as he told me that story. most of
it  he  made  up,  i'm  sure,  but  even  so  it  gave  me  a  quick  truth-goose.
because it's all relative. you're pinned down in some filthy hellhole of a
paddy,  getting  your  ass  delivered  to  kingdom  come,  but  then  for  a  few
seconds everything goes quiet and you look up and see the sun and a few
puffy  white  clouds,  and  the  immense  serenity  flashes  against  your
eyeballs—the  whole  world  gets  rearranged—and  even  though  you're
pinned down by a war you never felt more at peace.


what sticks to memory, often, are those odd little fragments that have

no beginning and no end:


norman bowker lying on his back one night, watching the stars, then
whispering  to  me,  "i'll  tell  you  something,  o'brien.  if  i  could  have  one
wish, anything, i'd wish for my dad to write me a letter and say it's okay
if i don't win any medals. that's all my old man talks about, nothing else.
how he can't wait to see my goddamn medals."


or  kiowa  teaching  a  rain  dance  to  rat  kiley  and  dave  jensen,  the
three  of  them  whooping  and  leaping  around  barefoot  while  a  bunch  of
villagers  looked  on  with  a  mixture  of  fascination  and  giggly  horror.
afterward, rat said, "so where's the rain?" and kiowa said, "the earth is
slow,  but  the  buffalo  is  patient,"  and  rat  thought  about  it  and  said,
"yeah, but where's the rain?"


or ted lavender adopting an orphan puppy—feeding it from a plastic
spoon and carrying it in his rucksack until the day azar strapped it to a
claymore antipersonnel mine and squeezed the firing device.


the average age in our platoon, i'd guess, was nineteen or twenty, and
as  a  consequence  things  often  took  on  a  curiously  playful  atmosphere,
like a sporting event at some exotic reform school. the competition could
be lethal, yet there was a childlike exuberance to it all, lots of pranks and
horseplay.  like  when  azar  blew  away  ted  lavender's  puppy.  "what's
everybody so upset about?" azar said. "i mean, christ, i'm just a boy."




i remember these things, too.
the damp, fungal scent of an empty body bag.
a quarter moon rising over the nighttime paddies.
henry  dobbins  sitting  in  the  twilight,  sewing  on  his  new  buck-
sergeant  stripes,  quietly  singing,  "a  tisket,  a  tasket,  a  green  and  yellow
basket."

a field of elephant grass weighted with wind, bowing under the stir of
a  helicopter's  blades,  the  grass  dark  and  servile,  bending  low,  but  then
rising straight again when the chopper went away.

a red clay trail outside the village of my khe.
a hand grenade.
a slim, dead, dainty young man of about twenty.
kiowa saying, "no choice, tim. what else could you do?"
kiowa saying, "right?"
kiowa saying, "talk to me."



forty-three years old, and the war occurred half a lifetime ago, and yet
the  remembering  makes  it  now.  and  sometimes  remembering  will  lead
to a story, which makes it forever. that's what stories are for. stories are
for joining the past to the future. stories are for those late hours in the
night  when  you  can't  remember  how  you  got  from  where  you  were  to
where  you  are.  stories  are  for  eternity,  when  memory  is  erased,  when
there is nothing to remember except the story.

on the rainy river


this  is  one  story  i've  never  told  before.  not  to  anyone.  not  to  my
parents, not to my brother or sister, not even to my wife. to go into it,
i've  always  thought,  would  only  cause  embarrassment  for  all  of  us,  a
sudden  need  to  be  elsewhere,  which  is  the  natural  response  to  a
confession. even now, i'll admit, the story makes me squirm. for more
than  twenty  years  i've  had  to  live  with  it,  feeling  the  shame,  trying  to
push  it  away,  and  so  by  this  act  of  remembrance,  by  putting  the  facts
down on paper, i'm hoping to relieve at least some of the pressure on my
dreams. still, it's a hard story to tell. all of us, i suppose, like to believe



that  in  a  moral  emergency  we  will  behave  like  the  heroes  of  our  youth,
bravely  and  forthrightly,  without  thought  of  personal  loss  or  discredit.
certainly  that  was  my  conviction  back  in  the  summer  of  1968.  tim
o'brien: a secret hero. the lone ranger. if the stakes ever became high
enough—if  the  evil  were  evil  enough,  if  the  good  were  good  enough—i
would  simply  tap  a  secret  reservoir  of  courage  that  had  been
accumulating  inside  me  over  the  years.  courage,  i  seemed  to  think,
comes to us in finite quantities, like an inheritance, and by being frugal
and stashing it away and letting it earn interest, we steadily increase our
moral  capital  in  preparation  for  that  day  when  the  account  must  be
drawn  down.  it  was  a  comforting  theory.  it  dispensed  with  all  those
bothersome little acts of daily courage; it offered hope and grace to the
repetitive coward; it justified the past while amortizing the future.

in june of 1968, a month after graduating from macalester college, i
was  drafted  to  fight  a  war  i  hated.  i  was  twenty-one  years  old.  young,
yes,  and  politically  naive,  but  even  so  the  american  war  in  vietnam
seemed  to  me  wrong.  certain  blood  was  being  shed  for  uncertain
reasons.  i  saw  no  unity  of  purpose,  no  consensus  on  matters  of
philosophy  or  history  or  law.  the  very  facts  were  shrouded  in
uncertainty:  was  it  a  civil  war?  a  war  of  national  liberation  or  simple
aggression? who started it, and when, and why? what really happened
to the uss maddox on that dark night in the gulf of tonkin? was ho chi
minh  a  communist  stooge,  or  a  nationalist  savior,  or  both,  or  neither?
what about the geneva accords? what about seato and the cold war?
what  about  dominoes?  america  was  divided  on  these  and  a  thousand
other issues, and the debate had spilled out across the floor of the united
states senate and into the streets, and smart men in pinstripes could not
agree  on  even  the  most  fundamental  matters  of  public  policy.  the  only
certainty  that  summer  was  moral  confusion.  it  was  my  view  then,  and
still  is,  that  you  don't  make  war  without  knowing  why.  knowledge,  of
course, is always imperfect, but it seemed to me that when a nation goes
to war it must have reasonable confidence in the justice and imperative
of its cause. you can't fix your mistakes. once people are dead, you can't
make them undead.

in any case those were my convictions, and back in college i had taken
a  modest  stand  against  the  war.  nothing  radical,  no  hothead  stuff,  just
ringing  a  few  doorbells  for  gene  mccarthy,  composing  a  few  tedious,
uninspired  editorials  for  the  campus  newspaper.  oddly,  though,  it  was



almost  entirely  an  intellectual  activity.  i  brought  some  energy  to  it,  of
course,  but  it  was  the  energy  that  accompanies  almost  any  abstract
endeavor; i felt no personal danger; i felt no sense of an impending crisis
in  my  life.  stupidly,  with  a  kind  of  smug  removal  that  i  can't  begin  to
fathom,  i  assumed  that  the  problems  of  killing  and  dying  did  not  fall
within my special province.

the draft notice arrived on june 17, 1968. it was a humid afternoon, i
remember, cloudy and very quiet, and i'd just come in from a round of
golf.  my  mother  and  father  were  having  lunch  out  in  the  kitchen.  i
remember opening up the letter, scanning the first few lines, feeling the
blood go thick behind my eyes. i remember a sound in my head. it wasn't
thinking, just a silent howl. a million things all at once—i was too good
for  this  war.  too  smart,  too  compassionate,  too  everything.  it  couldn't
happen.  i  was  above  it.  i  had  the  world  dicked—phi  beta  kappa  and
summa  cum  laude  and  president  of  the  student  body  and  a  full-ride
scholarship for grad studies at harvard. a mistake, maybe—a foul-up in
the paperwork. i was no soldier. i hated boy scouts. i hated camping out.
i  hated  dirt  and  tents  and  mosquitoes.  the  sight  of  blood  made  me
queasy, and i couldn't tolerate authority, and i didn't know a rifle from a
slingshot.  i  was  a  liberal,  for  christ  sake:  if  they  needed  fresh  bodies,
why not draft some back-to-the-stone-age hawk? or some dumb jingo in
his hard hat and bomb hanoi button, or one of lbj's pretty daughters,
or  westmoreland's  whole  handsome  family—nephews  and  nieces  and
baby grandson. there should be a law, i thought. if you support a war, if
you think it's worth the price, that's fine, but you have to put your own
precious fluids on the line. you have to head for the front and hook up
with  an  infantry  unit  and  help  spill  the  blood.  and  you  have  to  bring
along your wife, or your kids, or your lover. a law, i thought.

i  remember  the  rage  in  my  stomach.  later  it  burned  down  to  a
smoldering  self-pity,  then  to  numbness.  at  dinner  that  night  my  father
asked what my plans were. "nothing," i said. "wait."


i spent the summer of 1968 working in an armour meatpacking plant
in  my  hometown  of  worthington,  minnesota.  the  plant  specialized  in
pork  products,  and  for  eight  hours  a  day  i  stood  on  a  quarter-mile
assembly line—more properly, a disassembly line—removing blood clots
from the necks of dead pigs. my job title, i believe, was declotter. after
slaughter, the hogs were decapitated, split down the length of the belly,



pried  open,  eviscerated,  and  strung  up  by  the  hind  hocks  on  a  high
conveyer belt. then gravity took over. by the time a carcass reached my
spot on the line, the fluids had mostly drained out, everything except for
thick  clots  of  blood  in  the  neck  and  upper  chest  cavity.  to  remove  the
stuff, i used a kind of water gun. the machine was heavy, maybe eighty
pounds,  and  was  suspended  from  the  ceiling  by  a  heavy  rubber  cord.
there was some bounce to it, an elastic up-and-down give, and the trick
was to maneuver the gun with your whole body, not lifting with the arms,
just letting the rubber cord do the work for you. at one end was a trigger;
at the muzzle end was a small nozzle and a steel roller brush. as a carcass
passed by, you'd lean forward and swing the gun up against the clots and
squeeze  the  trigger,  all  in  one  motion,  and  the  brush  would  whirl  and
water would come shooting out and you'd hear a quick splattering sound
as  the  clots  dissolved  into  a  fine  red  mist.  it  was  not  pleasant  work.
goggles  were  a  necessity,  and  a  rubber  apron,  but  even  so  it  was  like
standing for eight hours a day under a lukewarm blood-shower. at night
i'd go home smelling of pig. it wouldn't go away. even after a hot bath,
scrubbing hard, the stink was always there—like old bacon, or sausage, a
dense  greasy  pig-stink  that  soaked  deep  into  my  skin  and  hair.  among
other things, i remember, it was tough getting dates that summer. i felt
isolated; i spent a lot of time alone. and there was also that draft notice
tucked away in my wallet.

in  the  evenings  i'd  sometimes  borrow  my  father's  car  and  drive
aimlessly around town, feeling sorry for myself, thinking about the war
and  the  pig  factory  and  how  my  life  seemed  to  be  collapsing  toward
slaughter.  i  felt  paralyzed.  all  around  me  the  options  seemed  to  be
narrowing,  as  if  i  were  hurtling  down  a  huge  black  funnel,  the  whole
world squeezing in tight. there was no happy way out. the government
had  ended  most  graduate  school  deferments;  the  waiting  lists  for  the
national guard and reserves were impossibly long; my health was solid;
i  didn't  qualify  for  co  status—no  religious  grounds,  no  history  as  a
pacifist. moreover, i could not claim to be opposed to war as a matter of
general  principle.  there  were  occasions,  i  believed,  when  a  nation  was
justified  in  using  military  force  to  achieve  its  ends,  to  stop  a  hitler  or
some  comparable  evil,  and  i  told  myself  that  in  such  circumstances  i
would've  willingly  marched  off  to  the  battle.  the  problem,  though,  was
that a draft board did not let you choose your war.



beyond all this, or at the very center, was the raw fact of terror. i did
not  want  to  die.  not  ever.  but  certainly  not  then,  not  there,  not  in  a
wrong  war.  driving  up  main  street,  past  the  courthouse  and  the  ben
franklin store, i sometimes felt the fear spreading inside me like weeds.
i imagined myself dead. i imagined myself doing things i could not do—
charging an enemy position, taking aim at another human being.

at  some  point  in  mid-july  i  began  thinking  seriously  about  canada.
the border lay a few hundred miles north, an eight-hour drive. both my
conscience and my instincts were telling me to make a break for it, just
take  off  and  run  like  hell  and  never  stop.  in  the  beginning  the  idea
seemed purely abstract, the word canada printing itself out in my head;
but  after  a  time  i  could  see  particular  shapes  and  images,  the  sorry
details  of  my  own  future—a  hotel  room  in  winnipeg,  a  battered  old
suitcase, my father's eyes as i tried to explain myself over the telephone.
i could almost hear his voice, and my mother's. run, i'd think. then i'd
think, impossible. then a second later i'd think, run.

it  was  a  kind  of  schizophrenia.  a  moral  split.  i  couldn't  make  up  my
mind. i feared the war, yes, but i also feared exile. i was afraid of walking
away  from  my  own  life,  my  friends  and  my  family,  my  whole  history,
everything that mattered to me. i feared losing the respect of my parents.
i  feared  the  law.  i  feared  ridicule  and  censure.  my  hometown  was  a
conservative  little  spot  on  the  prairie,  a  place  where  tradition  counted,
and it was easy to imagine people sitting around a table down at the old
gobbler cafe on main street, coffee cups poised, the conversation slowly
zeroing in on the young o'brien kid, how the damned sissy had taken off
for canada. at night, when i couldn't sleep, i'd sometimes carry on fierce
arguments with those people. i'd be screaming at them, telling them how
much i detested their blind, thoughtless, automatic acquiescence to it all,
their  simple-minded  patriotism,  their  prideful  ignorance,  their  love-it-
or-leave-it platitudes, how they were sending me off to fight a war they
didn't  understand  and  didn't  want  to  understand.  i  held  them
responsible. by god, yes, i did. all of them—i held them personally and
individually  responsible—the  polyestered  kiwanis  boys,  the  merchants
and farmers, the pious churchgoers, the chatty housewives, the pta and
the lions club and the veterans of foreign wars and the fine upstanding
gentry out at the country club. they didn't know bao dai from the man
in the moon. they didn't know history. they didn't know the first thing
about  diem's  tyranny,  or  the  nature  of  vietnamese  nationalism,  or  the



long colonialism of the french—this was all too damned complicated, it
required  some  reading—but  no  matter,  it  was  a  war  to  stop  the
communists, plain and simple, which was how they liked things, and you
were  a  treasonous  pussy  if  you  had  second  thoughts  about  killing  or
dying for plain and simple reasons.

i was bitter, sure. but it was so much more than that.
the emotions went from outrage to terror to bewilderment to guilt to
sorrow and then back again to outrage. i felt a sickness inside me. real
disease.

most of this i've told before, or at least hinted at, but what i have never
told is the full truth. how i cracked. how at work one morning, standing
on  the  pig  line,  i  felt  something  break  open  in  my  chest.  i  don't  know
what it was. i'll never know. but it was real, i know that much, it was a
physical  rupture—a  cracking-leaking-popping  feeling.  i  remember
dropping my water gun. quickly, almost without thought, i took off my
apron and walked out of the plant and drove home. it was midmorning, i
remember, and the house was empty. down in my chest there was still
that  leaking  sensation,  something  very  warm  and  precious  spilling  out,
and i was covered with blood and hog-stink, and for a long while i just
concentrated  on  holding  myself  together.  i  remember  taking  a  hot
shower. i remember packing a suitcase and carrying it out to the kitchen,
standing  very  still  for  a  few  minutes,  looking  carefully  at  the  familiar
objects  all  around  me.  the  old  chrome  toaster,  the  telephone,  the  pink
and white formica on the kitchen counters. the room was full of bright
sunshine. everything sparkled. my house, i thought. my life. i'm not sure
how  long  i  stood  there,  but  later  i  scribbled  out  a  short  note  to  my
parents.

what it said, exactly, i don't recall now. something vague. taking off,

will call, love tim.


i drove north.
it's a blur now, as it was then, and all i remember is a sense of high
velocity and the feel of the steering wheel in my hands. i was riding on
adrenaline. a giddy feeling, in a way, except there was the dreamy edge
of  impossibility  to  it—like  running  a  dead-end  maze—no  way  out—it
couldn't  come  to  a  happy  conclusion  and  yet  i  was  doing  it  anyway
because  it  was  all  i  could  think  of  to  do.  it  was  pure  flight,  fast  and
mindless.  i  had  no  plan.  just  hit  the  border  at  high  speed  and  crash



through and keep on running. near dusk i passed through bemidji, then
turned northeast toward international falls. i spent the night in the car
behind  a  closed-down  gas  station  a  half  mile  from  the  border.  in  the
morning, after gassing up, i headed straight west along the rainy river,
which  separates  minnesota  from  canada,  and  which  for  me  separated
one life from another. the land was mostly wilderness. here and there i
passed a motel or bait shop, but otherwise the country unfolded in great
sweeps of pine and birch and sumac. though it was still august, the air
already  had  the  smell  of  october,  football  season,  piles  of  yellow-red
leaves, everything crisp and clean. i remember a huge blue sky. off to my
right was the rainy river, wide as a lake in places, and beyond the rainy
river was canada.

for  a  while  i  just  drove,  not  aiming  at  anything,  then  in  the  late
morning  i  began  looking  for  a  place  to  lie  low  for  a  day  or  two.  i  was
exhausted, and scared sick, and around noon i pulled into an old fishing
resort  called  the  tip  top  lodge.  actually  it  was  not  a  lodge  at  all,  just
eight  or  nine  tiny  yellow  cabins  clustered  on  a  peninsula  that  jutted
northward into the rainy river. the place was in sorry shape. there was
a  dangerous  wooden  dock,  an  old  minnow  tank,  a  flimsy  tar  paper
boathouse along the shore.

the main building, which stood in a cluster of pines on high ground,
seemed to lean heavily to one side, like a cripple, the roof sagging toward
canada. briefly, i thought about turning around, just giving up, but then
i got out of the car and walked up to the front porch.

the man who opened the door that day is the hero of my life. how do i
say  this  without  sounding  sappy?  blurt  it  out—the  man  saved  me.  he
offered  exactly  what  i  needed,  without  questions,  without  any  words  at
all.  he  took  me  in.  he  was  there  at  the  critical  time—a  silent,  watchful
presence. six days later, when it ended, i was unable to find a proper way
to  thank  him,  and  i  never  have,  and  so,  if  nothing  else,  this  story
represents a small gesture of gratitude twenty years overdue.

even after two decades i can close my eyes and return to that porch at
the  tip  top  lodge.  i  can  see  the  old  guy  staring  at  me.  elroy  berdahl:
eighty-one  years  old,  skinny  and  shrunken  and  mostly  bald.  he  wore  a
flannel shirt and brown work pants. in one hand, i remember, he carried
a green apple, a small paring knife in the other. his eyes had the bluish
gray color of a razor blade, the same polished shine, and as he peered up
at me i felt a strange sharpness, almost painful, a cutting sensation, as if



his gaze were somehow slicing me open. in part, no doubt, it was my own
sense  of  guilt,  but  even  so  i'm  absolutely  certain  that  the  old  man  took
one look and went right to the heart of things—a kid in trouble. when i
asked for a room, elroy made a little clicking sound with his tongue. he
nodded, led me out to one of the cabins, and dropped a key in my hand. i
remember  smiling  at  him.  i  also  remember  wishing  i  hadn't.  the  old
man shook his head as if to tell me it wasn't worth the bother.

"dinner at five-thirty," he said. "you eat fish?"
"anything," i said.
elroy grunted and said, "i'll bet."



we spent six days together at the tip top lodge. just the two of us.
tourist  season  was  over,  and  there  were  no  boats  on  the  river,  and  the
wilderness  seemed  to  withdraw  into  a  great  permanent  stillness.  over
those  six  days  elroy  berdahl  and  i  took  most  of  our  meals  together.  in
the mornings we sometimes went out on long hikes into the woods, and
at night we played scrabble or listened to records or sat reading in front
of his big stone fireplace. at times i felt the awkwardness of an intruder,
but elroy accepted me into his quiet routine without fuss or ceremony.
he took my presence for granted, the same way he might've sheltered a
stray cat—no wasted sighs or pity—and there was never any talk about it.
just  the  opposite.  what  i  remember  more  than  anything  is  the  man's
willful, almost ferocious silence. in all that time together, all those hours,
he never asked the obvious questions: why was i there? why alone? why
so  preoccupied?  if  elroy  was  curious  about  any  of  this,  he  was  careful
never to put it into words.

my hunch, though, is that he already knew. at least the basics. after
all, it was 1968, and guys were burning draft cards, and canada was just
a boat ride away. elroy berdahl was no hick. his bedroom, i remember,
was cluttered with books and newspapers. he killed me at the scrabble
board,  barely  concentrating,  and  on  those  occasions  when  speech  was
necessary he had a way of compressing large thoughts into small, cryptic
packets of language. one evening, just at sunset, he pointed up at an owl
circling over the violet-lighted forest to the west. "hey, o'brien," he said.
"there's jesus." the man was sharp—he didn't miss much. those razor
eyes.  now  and  then  he'd  catch  me  staring  out  at  the  river,  at  the  far
shore, and i could almost hear the tumblers clicking in his head. maybe
i'm wrong, but i doubt it.



one  thing  for  certain,  he  knew  i  was  in  desperate  trouble.  and  he
knew i couldn't talk about it. the wrong word—or even the right word—
and  i  would've  disappeared.  i  was  wired  and  jittery.  my  skin  felt  too
tight. after supper one evening i vomited and went back to my cabin and
lay  down  for  a  few  moments  and  then  vomited  again;  another  time,  in
the middle of the afternoon, i began sweating and couldn't shut it off. i
went  through  whole  days  feeling  dizzy  with  sorrow.  i  couldn't  sleep;  i
couldn't  lie  still.  at  night  i'd  toss  around  in  bed,  half  awake,  half
dreaming, imagining how i'd sneak down to the beach and quietly push
one of the old man's boats out into the river and start paddling my way
toward canada. there were times when i thought i'd gone off the psychic
edge. i couldn't tell up from down, i was just falling, and late in the night
i'd  lie  there  watching  weird  pictures  spin  through  my  head.  getting
chased  by  the  border  patrol—helicopters  and  searchlights  and  barking
dogs—i'd be crashing through the woods, i'd be down on my hands and
knees—people  shouting  out  my  name—the  law  closing  in  on  all  sides—
my hometown draft board and the fbi and the royal canadian mounted
police.  it  all  seemed  crazy  and  impossible.  twenty-one  years  old,  an
ordinary  kid  with  all  the  ordinary  dreams  and  ambitions,  and  all  i
wanted  was  to  live  the  life  i  was  born  to—a  mainstream  life—i  loved
baseball  and  hamburgers  and  cherry  cokes—and  now  i  was  off  on  the
margins of exile, leaving my country forever, and it seemed so impossible
and terrible and sad.

i'm  not  sure  how  i  made  it  through  those  six  days.  most  of  it  i  can't
remember. on two or three afternoons, to pass some time, i helped elroy
get the place ready for winter, sweeping down the cabins and hauling in
the boats, little chores that kept my body moving. the days were cool and
bright. the nights were very dark. one morning the old man showed me
how to split and stack firewood, and for several hours we just worked in
silence out behind his house. at one point, i remember, elroy put down
his maul and looked at me for a long time, his lips drawn as if framing a
difficult question, but then he shook his head and went back to work. the
man's  self-control  was  amazing.  he  never  pried.  he  never  put  me  in  a
position  that  required  lies  or  denials.  to  an  extent,  i  suppose,  his
reticence was typical of that part of minnesota, where privacy still held
value,  and  even  if  i'd  been  walking  around  with  some  horrible
deformity—four  arms  and  three  heads—i'm  sure  the  old  man  would've
talked  about  everything  except  those  extra  arms  and  heads.  simple
politeness  was  part  of  it.  but  even  more  than  that,  i  think,  the  man



understood that words were insufficient. the problem had gone beyond
discussion. during that long summer i'd been over and over the various
arguments,  all  the  pros  and  cons,  and  it  was  no  longer  a  question  that
could be decided by an act of pure reason. intellect had come up against
emotion. my conscience told me to run, but some irrational and powerful
force  was  resisting,  like  a  weight  pushing  me  toward  the  war.  what  it
came down to, stupidly, was a sense of shame. hot, stupid shame. i did
not  want  people  to  think  badly  of  me.  not  my  parents,  not  my  brother
and sister, not even the folks down at the gobbler cafe. i was ashamed to
be there at the tip top lodge. i was ashamed of my conscience, ashamed
to be doing the right thing.

some of this elroy must've understood. not the details, of course, but

the plain fact of crisis.

although  the  old  man  never  confronted  me  about  it,  there  was  one
occasion  when  he  came  close  to  forcing  the  whole  thing  out  into  the
open. it was early evening, and we'd just finished supper, and over coffee
and  dessert  i  asked  him  about  my  bill,  how  much  i  owed  so  far.  for  a
long while the old man squinted down at the tablecloth.

"well,  the  basic  rate,"  he  said,  "is  fifty  bucks  a  night.  not  counting

meals. this makes four nights, right?"

i nodded. i had three hundred and twelve dollars in my wallet.
elroy kept his eyes on the tablecloth. "now that's an on-season price.
to be fair, i suppose we should knock it down a peg or two." he leaned
back in his chair. "what's a reasonable number, you figure?"

"i don't know," i said. "forty?"
"forty's  good.  forty  a  night.  then  we  tack  on  food—say  another

hundred? two hundred sixty total?"

"i guess."
he raised his eyebrows. "too much?"
"no, that's fair. it's fine. tomorrow, though ... i think i'd better take off

tomorrow."

elroy shrugged and began clearing the table. for a time he fussed with
the dishes, whistling to himself as if the subject had been settled. after a
second he slapped his hands together.

"you know what we forgot?" he said. "we forgot wages. those odd jobs
you  done.  what  we  have  to  do,  we  have  to  figure  out  what  your  time's
worth. your last job—how much did you pull in an hour?"



"not enough," i said.
"a bad one?"
"yes. pretty bad."
slowly then, without intending any long sermon, i told him about my
days  at  the  pig  plant.  it  began  as  a  straight  recitation  of  the  facts,  but
before  i  could  stop  myself  i  was  talking  about  the  blood  clots  and  the
water gun and how the smell had soaked into my skin and how i couldn't
wash  it  away.  i  went  on  for  a  long  time.  i  told  him  about  wild  hogs
squealing in my dreams, the sounds of butchery, slaughterhouse sounds,
and how i'd sometimes wake up with that greasy pig-stink in my throat.

when i was finished, elroy nodded at me.
"well,  to  be  honest,"  he  said,  "when  you  first  showed  up  here,  i
wondered about all that. the aroma, i mean. smelled like you was awful
damned  fond  of  pork  chops."  the  old  man  almost  smiled.  he  made  a
snuffling  sound,  then  sat  down  with  a  pencil  and  a  piece  of  paper.  "so
what'd this crud job pay? ten bucks an hour? fifteen?"

"less."
elroy  shook  his  head.  "let's  make  it  fifteen.  you  put  in  twenty-five
hours  here,  easy.  that's  three  hundred  seventy-five  bucks  total  wages.
we subtract the two hundred sixty for food and lodging, i still owe you a
hundred and fifteen."

he took four fifties out of his shirt pocket and laid them on the table.
"call it even," he said.
"no."
"pick it up. get yourself a haircut."
the money lay on the table for the rest of the evening. it was still there
when  i  went  back  to  my  cabin.  in  the  morning,  though,  i  found  an
envelope tacked to my door. inside were the four fifties and a two-word
note that said

emergency fund.
the man knew.



looking back after twenty years, i sometimes wonder if the events of
that summer didn't happen in some other dimension, a place where your
life exists before you've lived it, and where it goes afterward. none of it
ever seemed real. during my time at the tip top lodge i had the feeling



that i'd slipped out of my own skin, hovering a few feet away while some
poor yo-yo with my name and face tried to make his way toward a future
he didn't understand and didn't want. even now i can see myself as i was
then.  it's  like  watching  an  old  home  movie:  i'm  young  and  tan  and  fit.
i've  got  hair—lots  of  it.  i  don't  smoke  or  drink.  i'm  wearing  faded  blue
jeans and a white polo shirt. i can see myself sitting on elroy berdahl's
dock near dusk one evening, the sky a bright shimmering pink, and i'm
finishing  up  a  letter  to  my  parents  that  tells  what  i'm  about  to  do  and
why i'm doing it and how sorry i am that i'd never found the courage to
talk to them about it. i ask them not to be angry. i try to explain some of
my  feelings,  but  there  aren't  enough  words,  and  so  i  just  say  that  it's  a
thing  that  has  to  be  done.  at  the  end  of  the  letter  i  talk  about  the
vacations  we  used  to  take  up  in  this  north  country,  at  a  place  called
whitefish  lake,  and  how  the  scenery  here  reminds  me  of  those  good
times. i tell them i'm fine. i tell them i'll write again from winnipeg or
montreal or wherever i end up.


on my last full day, the sixth day, the old man took me out fishing on
the rainy river. the afternoon was sunny and cold. a stiff breeze came
in  from  the  north,  and  i  remember  how  the  little  fourteen-foot  boat
made sharp rocking motions as we pushed off from the dock. the current
was fast. all around us, i remember, there was a vastness to the world,
an unpeopled rawness, just the trees and the sky and the water reaching
out toward nowhere. the air had the brittle scent of october.

for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  elroy  held  a  course  upstream,  the  river
choppy and silver-gray, then he turned straight north and put the engine
on full throttle. i felt the bow lift beneath me. i remember the wind in my
ears,  the  sound  of  the  old  outboard  evinrude.  for  a  time  i  didn't  pay
attention  to  anything,  just  feeling  the  cold  spray  against  my  face,  but
then  it  occurred  to  me  that  at  some  point  we  must've  passed  into
canadian  waters,  across  that  dotted  line  between  two  different  worlds,
and  i  remember  a  sudden  tightness  in  my  chest  as  i  looked  up  and
watched  the  far  shore  come  at  me.  this  wasn't  a  daydream.  it  was
tangible  and  real.  as  we  came  in  toward  land,  elroy  cut  the  engine,
letting the boat fishtail lightly about twenty yards off shore. the old man
didn't look at me or speak. bending down, he opened up his tackle box
and busied himself with a bobber and a piece of wire leader, humming to
himself, his eyes down.



it  struck  me  then  that  he  must've  planned  it.  i'll  never  be  certain,  of
course, but i think he meant to bring me up against the realities, to guide
me across the river and to take me to the edge and to stand a kind of vigil
as i chose a life for myself.

i remember staring at the old man, then at my hands, then at canada.
the  shoreline  was  dense  with  brush  and  timber.  i  could  see  tiny  red
berries on the bushes. i could see a squirrel up in one of the birch trees, a
big  crow  looking  at  me  from  a  boulder  along  the  river.  that  close—
twenty yards—and i could see the delicate latticework of the leaves, the
texture  of  the  soil,  the  browned  needles  beneath  the  pines,  the
configurations  of  geology  and  human  history.  twenty  yards.  i  could've
done it. i could've jumped and started swimming for my life. inside me,
in my chest, i felt a terrible squeezing pressure. even now, as i write this,
i can still feel that tightness. and i want you to feel it—the wind coming
off  the  river,  the  waves,  the  silence,  the  wooded  frontier.  you're  at  the
bow  of  a  boat  on  the  rainy  river.  you're  twenty-one  years  old,  you're
scared, and there's a hard squeezing pressure in your chest.

what would you do?
would you jump? would you feel pity for yourself? would you think
about  your  family  and  your  childhood  and  your  dreams  and  all  you're
leaving behind? would it hurt? would it feel like dying? would you cry,
as i did?

i tried to swallow it back. i tried to smile, except i was crying.
now,  perhaps,  you  can  understand  why  i've  never  told  this  story
before.  it's  not  just  the  embarrassment  of  tears.  that's  part  of  it,  no
doubt,  but  what  embarrasses  me  much  more,  and  always  will,  is  the
paralysis that took my heart. a moral freeze: i couldn't decide, i couldn't
act,  i  couldn't  comport  myself  with  even  a  pretense  of  modest  human
dignity.

all i could do was cry. quietly, not bawling, just the chest-chokes.
at the rear of the boat elroy berdahl pretended not to notice. he held
a  fishing  rod  in  his  hands,  his  head  bowed  to  hide  his  eyes.  he  kept
humming  a  soft,  monotonous  little  tune.  everywhere,  it  seemed,  in  the
trees and water and sky, a great worldwide sadness came pressing down
on me, a crushing sorrow, sorrow like i had never known it before. and
what  was  so  sad,  i  realized,  was  that  canada  had  become  a  pitiful
fantasy.  silly  and  hopeless.  it  was  no  longer  a  possibility.  right  then,
with the shore so close, i understood that i would not do what i should



do. i would not swim away from my hometown and my country and my
life. i would not be brave. that old image of myself as a hero, as a man of
conscience  and  courage,  all  that  was  just  a  threadbare  pipe  dream.
bobbing there on the rainy river, looking back at the minnesota shore, i
felt a sudden swell of helplessness come over me, a drowning sensation,
as  if  i  had  toppled  overboard  and  was  being  swept  away  by  the  silver
waves. chunks of my own history flashed by. i saw a seven-year-old boy
in a white cowboy hat and a lone ranger mask and a pair of holstered
six-shooters; i saw a twelve-year-old little league shortstop pivoting to
turn a double play; i saw a sixteen-year-old kid decked out for his first
prom, looking spiffy in a white tux and a black bow tie, his hair cut short
and flat, his shoes freshly polished. my whole life seemed to spill out into
the  river,  swirling  away  from  me,  everything  i  had  ever  been  or  ever
wanted to be. i couldn't get my breath; i couldn't stay afloat; i couldn't
tell which way to swim. a hallucination, i suppose, but it was as real as
anything i would ever feel. i saw my parents calling to me from the far
shoreline. i saw my brother and sister, all the townsfolk, the mayor and
the entire chamber of commerce and all my old teachers and girlfriends
and  high  school  buddies.  like  some  weird  sporting  event:  everybody
screaming  from  the  sidelines,  rooting  me  on—a  loud  stadium  roar.
hotdogs  and  popcorn—stadium  smells,  stadium  heat.  a  squad  of
cheerleaders did cartwheels along the banks of the rainy river; they had
megaphones  and  pompoms  and  smooth  brown  thighs.  the  crowd
swayed left and right. a marching band played fight songs. all my aunts
and  uncles  were  there,  and  abraham  lincoln,  and  saint  george,  and  a
nine-year-old  girl  named  linda  who  had  died  of  a  brain  tumor  back  in
fifth grade, and several members of the united states senate, and a blind
poet scribbling notes, and lbj, and huck finn, and abbie hoffman, and
all the dead soldiers back from the grave, and the many thousands who
were later to die—villagers with terrible burns, little kids without arms or
legs—yes, and the joint chiefs of staff were there, and a couple of popes,
and a first lieutenant named jimmy cross, and the last surviving veteran
of the american civil war, and jane fonda dressed up as barbarella, and
an  old  man  sprawled  beside  a  pigpen,  and  my  grandfather,  and  gary
cooper,  and  a  kind-faced  woman  carrying  an  umbrella  and  a  copy  of
plato's  republic,  and  a  million  ferocious  citizens  waving  flags  of  all
shapes and colors—people in hard hats, people in headbands—they were
all whooping and chanting and urging me toward one shore or the other.
i saw faces from my distant past and distant future. my wife was there.



my  unborn  daughter  waved  at  me,  and  my  two  sons  hopped  up  and
down,  and  a  drill  sergeant  named  blyton  sneered  and  shot  up  a  finger
and shook his head. there was a choir in bright purple robes. there was
a cabbie from the bronx. there was a slim young man i would one day
kill with a hand grenade along a red clay trail outside the village of my
khe.

the  little  aluminum  boat  rocked  softly  beneath  me.  there  was  the

wind and the sky.

i tried to will myself overboard.
i gripped the edge of the boat and leaned forward and thought, now.
i did try. it just wasn't possible.
all  those  eyes  on  me—the  town,  the  whole  universe—and  i  couldn't
risk  the  embarrassment.  it  was  as  if  there  were  an  audience  to  my  life,
that  swirl  of  faces  along  the  river,  and  in  my  head  i  could  hear  people
screaming  at  me.  traitor!  they  yelled.  turncoat!  pussy!  i  felt  myself
blush.  i  couldn't  tolerate  it.  i  couldn't  endure  the  mockery,  or  the
disgrace, or the patriotic ridicule. even in my imagination, the shore just
twenty yards away, i couldn't make myself be brave. it had nothing to do
with morality. embarrassment, that's all it was.

and right then i submitted.
i  would  go  to  the  war—i  would  kill  and  maybe  die—because  i  was

embarrassed not to.

that was the sad thing. and so i sat in the bow of the boat and cried.
it was loud now. loud, hard crying.
elroy  berdahl  remained  quiet.  he  kept  fishing.  he  worked  his  line
with the tips of his fingers, patiently, squinting out at his red and white
bobber on the rainy river. his eyes were flat and impassive. he didn't
speak. he was simply there, like the river and the late-summer sun. and
yet by his presence, his mute watchfulness, he made it real. he was the
true audience. he was a witness, like god, or like the gods, who look on
in absolute silence as we live our lives, as we make our choices or fail to
make them.

"ain't biting," he said.
then after a time the old man pulled in his line and turned the boat

back toward minnesota.




i  don't  remember  saying  goodbye.  that  last  night  we  had  dinner
together,  and  i  went  to  bed  early,  and  in  the  morning  elroy  fixed
breakfast for me. when i told him i'd be leaving, the old man nodded as
if he already knew. he looked down at the table and smiled.

at some point later in the morning it's possible that we shook hands—i
just don't remember—but i do know that by the time i'd finished packing
the old man had disappeared. around noon, when i took my suitcase out
to the car, i noticed that his old black pickup truck was no longer parked
in  front  of  the  house.  i  went  inside  and  waited  for  a  while,  but  i  felt  a
bone  certainty  that  he  wouldn't  be  back.  in  a  way,  i  thought,  it  was
appropriate.  i  washed  up  the  breakfast  dishes,  left  his  two  hundred
dollars on the kitchen counter, got into the car, and drove south toward
home.

the  day  was  cloudy.  i  passed  through  towns  with  familiar  names,
through the pine forests and down to the prairie, and then to vietnam,
where  i  was  a  soldier,  and  then  home  again.  i  survived,  but  it's  not  a
happy ending. i was a coward. i went to the war.

enemies


one morning in late july, while we were out on patrol near lz gator,
lee strunk and dave jensen got into a fistfight. it was about something
stupid—a  missing  jackknife—but  even  so  the  fight  was  vicious.  for  a
while  it  went  back  and  forth,  but  dave  jensen  was  much  bigger  and
much stronger, and eventually he wrapped an arm around strunk's neck
and pinned him down and kept hitting him on the nose. he hit him hard.
and  he  didn't  stop.  strunk's  nose  made  a  sharp  snapping  sound,  like  a
firecracker, but even then jensen kept hitting him, over and over, quick
stiff punches that did not miss. it took three of us to pull him off. when it
was over, strunk had to be choppered back to the rear, where he had his
nose  looked  after,  and  two  days  later  he  rejoined  us  wearing  a  metal
splint and lots of gauze.

in  any  other  circumstance  it  might've  ended  there.  but  this  was
vietnam, where guys carried guns, and dave jensen started to worry. it
was mostly in his head. there were no threats, no vows of revenge, just a
silent tension between them that made jensen take special precautions.
on patrol he was careful to keep track of strunk's whereabouts. he dug



his foxholes on the far side of the perimeter; he kept his back covered; he
avoided  situations  that  might  put  the  two  of  them  alone  together.
eventually,  after  a  week  of  this,  the  strain  began  to  create  problems.
jensen couldn't relax. like fighting two different wars, he said. no safe
ground:  enemies  everywhere.  no  front  or  rear.  at  night  he  had  trouble
sleeping—a  skittish  feeling—always  on  guard,  hearing  strange  noises  in
the  dark,  imagining  a  grenade  rolling  into  his  foxhole  or  the  tickle  of  a
knife  against  his  ear.  the  distinction  between  good  guys  and  bad  guys
disappeared for him. even in times of relative safety, while the rest of us
took it easy, jensen would be sitting with his back against a stone wall,
weapon across his knees, watching lee strunk with quick, nervous eyes.
it  got  to  the  point  finally  where  he  lost  control.  something  must've
snapped. one afternoon he began firing his weapon into the air, yelling
strunk's name, just firing and yelling, and it didn't stop until he'd rattled
off  an  entire  magazine  of  ammunition.  we  were  all  flat  on  the  ground.
nobody had the nerve to go near him. jensen started to reload, but then
suddenly he sat down and held his head in his arms and wouldn't move.
for two or three hours he simply sat there.

but that wasn't the bizarre part.
because  late  that  same  night  he  borrowed  a  pistol,  gripped  it  by  the

barrel, and used it like a hammer to break his own nose.

afterward,  he  crossed  the  perimeter  to  lee  strunk's  foxhole.  he
showed him what he'd done and asked if everything was square between
them.

strunk nodded and said, sure, things were square.
but  in  the  morning  lee  strunk  couldn't  stop  laughing.  "the  man's

crazy," he said. "i stole his fucking jackknife."

friends


dave jensen and lee strunk did not become instant buddies, but they
did learn to trust each other. over the next month they often teamed up
on ambushes. they covered each other on patrol, shared a foxhole, took
turns pulling guard at night. in late august they made a pact that if one
of  them  should  ever  get  totally  rucked  up—a  wheelchair  wound—the
other guy would automatically find a way to end it. as far as i could tell



they  were  serious.  they  drew  it  up  on  paper,  signing  their  names  and
asking  a  couple  of  guys  to  act  as  witnesses.  and  then  in  october  lee
strunk stepped on a rigged mortar round. it took off his right leg at the
knee.  he  managed  a  funny  little  half  step,  like  a  hop,  then  he  tilted
sideways  and  dropped.  "oh,  damn,"  he  said.  for  a  while  he  kept  on
saying it, "damn oh damn," as if he'd stubbed a toe. then he panicked.
he tried to get up and run, but there was nothing left to run on. he fell
hard.  the  stump  of  his  right  leg  was  twitching.  there  were  slivers  of
bone,  and  the  blood  came  in  quick  spurts  like  water  from  a  pump.  he
seemed  bewildered.  he  reached  down  as  if  to  massage  his  missing  leg,
then he passed out, and rat kiley put on a tourniquet and administered
morphine and ran plasma into him.

there was nothing much anybody could do except wait for the dustoff.
after we'd secured an lz, dave jensen went over and kneeled at strunk's
side. the stump had stopped twitching now. for a time there was some
question as to whether strunk was still alive, but then he opened his eyes
and  looked  up  at  dave  jensen.  "oh,  jesus,"  he  said,  and  moaned,  and
tried to slide away and said, "jesus, man, don't kill me."

"relax," jensen said.
lee strunk seemed groggy and confused. he lay still for a second and
then motioned toward his leg. "really, it's not so bad, not terrible. hey,
really—they can sew it back on—really."

"right, i'll bet they can."
"you think?"
"sure i do."
strunk  frowned  at  the  sky.  he  passed  out  again,  then  woke  up  and

said, "don't kill me."

"i won't," jensen said.
"i'm serious."
"sure."
"but you got to promise. swear it to me—swear you won't kill me."
jensen  nodded  and  said,  "i  swear,"  and  then  a  little  later  we  carried
strunk to the dustoff chopper. jensen reached out and touched the good
leg.  "go  on  now,"  he  said.  later  we  heard  that  strunk  died  somewhere
over  chu  lai,  which  seemed  to  relieve  dave  jensen  of  an  enormous
weight.




how to tell a true war story


this is true.
i  had  a  buddy  in  vietnam.  his  name  was  bob  kiley,  but  everybody

called him rat.

a  friend  of  his  gets  killed,  so  about  a  week  later  rat  sits  down  and
writes a letter to the guy's sister. rat tells her what a great brother she
had,  how  together  the  guy  was,  a  number  one  pal  and  comrade.  a  real
soldier's soldier, rat says. then he tells a few stories to make the point,
how  her  brother  would  always  volunteer  for  stuff  nobody  else  would
volunteer  for  in  a  million  years,  dangerous  stuff,  like  doing  recon  or
going  out  on  these  really  badass  night  patrols.  stainless  steel  balls,  rat
tells her. the guy was a little crazy, for sure, but crazy in a good way, a
real  daredevil,  because  he  liked  the  challenge  of  it,  he  liked  testing
himself, just man against gook. a great, great guy, rat says.

anyway,  it's  a  terrific  letter,  very  personal  and  touching.  rat  almost
bawls writing it. he gets all teary telling about the good times they had
together, how her brother made the war seem almost fun, always raising
hell and lighting up villes and bringing smoke to bear every which way. a
great  sense  of  humor,  too.  like  the  time  at  this  river  when  he  went
fishing with a whole damn crate of hand grenades. probably the funniest
thing in world history, rat says, all that gore, about twenty zillion dead
gook fish. her brother, he had the right attitude. he knew how to have a
good time. on halloween, this real hot spooky night, the dude paints up
his body all different colors and puts on this weird mask and hikes over
to  a  ville  and  goes  trick-or-treating  almost  stark  naked,  just  boots  and
balls  and  an  m-16.  a  tremendous  human  being,  rat  says.  pretty  nutso
sometimes, but you could trust him with your life.

and then the letter gets very sad and serious. rat pours his heart out.
he  says  he  loved  the  guy.  he  says  the  guy  was  his  best  friend  in  the
world. they were like soul mates, he says, like twins or something, they
had  a  whole  lot  in  common.  he  tells  the  guy's  sister  he'll  look  her  up
when the war's over.
so what happens?



rat  mails  the  letter.  he  waits  two  months.  the  dumb  cooze  never

writes back.


a  true  war  story  is  never  moral.  it  does  not  instruct,  nor  encourage
virtue, nor suggest models of proper human behavior, nor restrain men
from doing the things men have always done. if a story seems moral, do
not believe it. if at the end of a war story you feel uplifted, or if you feel
that some small bit of rectitude has been salvaged from the larger waste,
then you have been made the victim of a very old and terrible lie. there is
no  rectitude  whatsoever.  there  is  no  virtue.  as  a  first  rule  of  thumb,
therefore,  you  can  tell  a  true  war  story  by
its  absolute  and
uncompromising  allegiance  to  obscenity  and  evil.  listen  to  rat  kiley.
cooze, he says. he does not say bitch. he certainly does not say woman,
or girl. he says cooze. then he spits and stares. he's nineteen years old—
it's too much for him—so he looks at you with those big sad gentle killer
eyes  and  says  cooze,  because  his  friend  is  dead,  and  because  it's  so
incredibly sad and true: she never wrote back.

you can tell a true war story if it embarrasses you. if you don't care for
obscenity,  you  don't  care  for  the  truth;  if  you  don't  care  for  the  truth,
watch how you vote. send guys to war, they come home talking dirty.

listen to rat: "jesus christ, man, i write this beautiful fuckin' letter, i

slave over it, and what happens? the dumb cooze never writes back."


the  dead  guy's  name  was  curt  lemon.  what  happened  was,  we
crossed a muddy river and marched west into the mountains, and on the
third  day  we  took  a  break  along  a  trail  junction  in  deep  jungle.  right
away,  lemon  and  rat  kiley  started  goofing.  they  didn't  understand
about  the  spookiness.  they  were  kids;  they  just  didn't  know.  a  nature
hike,  they  thought,  not  even  a  war,  so  they  went  off  into  the  shade  of
some  giant  trees—quadruple  canopy,  no  sunlight  at  all—and  they  were
giggling  and  calling  each  other  yellow  mother  and  playing  a  silly  game
they'd  invented.  the  game  involved  smoke  grenades,  which  were
harmless unless you did stupid things, and what they did was pull out the
pin  and  stand  a  few  feet  apart  and  play  catch  under  the  shade  of  those
huge trees. whoever chickened out was a yellow mother. and if nobody
chickened out, the grenade would make a light popping sound and they'd
be covered with smoke and they'd laugh and dance around and then do it
again.



it's all exactly true.
it happened, to me, nearly twenty years ago, and i still remember that
trail junction and those giant trees and a soft dripping sound somewhere
beyond the trees. i remember the smell of moss. up in the canopy there
were  tiny  white  blossoms,  but  no  sunlight  at  all,  and  i  remember  the
shadows spreading out under the trees where curt lemon and rat kiley
were  playing  catch  with  smoke  grenades.  mitchell  sanders  sat  flipping
his yo-yo. norman bowker and kiowa and dave jensen were dozing, or
half dozing, and all around us were those ragged green mountains.

except for the laughter things were quiet.
at one point, i remember, mitchell sanders turned and looked at me,
not  quite  nodding,  as  if  to  warn  me  about  something,  as  if  he  already
knew, then after a while he rolled up his yo-yo and moved away.

it's hard to tell you what happened next.
they  were  just  goofing.  there  was  a  noise,  i  suppose,  which  must've
been  the  detonator,  so  i  glanced  behind  me  and  watched  lemon  step
from  the  shade  into  bright  sunlight.  his  face  was  suddenly  brown  and
shining.  a  handsome  kid,  really.  sharp  gray  eyes,  lean  and  narrow-
waisted, and when he died it was almost beautiful, the way the sunlight
came around him and lifted him up and sucked him high into a tree full
of moss and vines and white blossoms.


in  any  war  story,  but  especially  a  true  one,  it's  difficult  to  separate
what  happened  from  what  seemed  to  happen.  what  seems  to  happen
becomes  its  own  happening  and  has  to  be  told  that  way.  the  angles  of
vision are skewed. when a booby trap explodes, you close your eyes and
duck and float outside yourself. when a guy dies, like curt lemon, you
look away and then look back for a moment and then look away again.
the  pictures  get  jumbled;  you  tend  to  miss  a  lot.  and  then  afterward,
when  you  go  to  tell  about  it,  there  is  always  that  surreal  seemingness,
which  makes  the  story  seem  untrue,  but  which  in  fact  represents  the
hard and exact truth as it seemed.


in many cases a true war story cannot be believed. if you believe it, be
skeptical.  it's  a  question  of  credibility.  often  the  crazy  stuff  is  true  and
the normal stuff isn't, because the normal stuff is necessary to make you
believe the truly incredible craziness.



in other cases you can't even tell a true war story. sometimes it's just

beyond telling.

i heard this one, for example, from mitchell sanders. it was near dusk
and  we  were  sitting  at  my  foxhole  along  a  wide  muddy  river  north  of
quang ngai. i remember how peaceful the twilight was. a deep pinkish
red  spilled  out  on  the  river,  which  moved  without  sound,  and  in  the
morning  we  would  cross  the  river  and  march  west  into  the  mountains.
the occasion was right for a good story.

"god's  truth,"  mitchell  sanders  said.  "a  six-man  patrol  goes  up  into
the mountains on a basic listening-post operation. the idea's to spend a
week up there, just lie low and listen for enemy movement. they've got a
radio  along,  so  if  they  hear  anything  suspicious—anything—they're
supposed  to  call  in  artillery  or  gunships,  whatever  it  takes.  otherwise
they keep strict field discipline. absolute silence. they just listen."

sanders glanced at me to make sure i had the scenario. he was playing

with his yo-yo, dancing it with short, tight little strokes of the wrist.

his face was blank in the dusk.
"we're  talking  regulation,  by-the-book  lp.  these  six  guys,  they  don't

say boo for a solid week. they don't got tongues. all ears."

"right," i said.
"understand me?"
"invisible."
sanders nodded.
"affirm,"  he  said.  "invisible.  so  what  happens  is,  these  guys  get
themselves deep in the bush, all camouflaged up, and they lie down and
wait and that's all they do, nothing else, they lie there for seven straight
days  and  just  listen.  and  man,  i'll  tell  you—it's  spooky.  this  is
mountains.  you  don't  know  spooky  till  you  been  there.  jungle,  sort  of,
except  it's  way  up  in  the  clouds  and  there's  always  this  fog—like  rain,
except  it's  not  raining—everything's  all  wet  and  swirly  and  tangled  up
and you can't see jack, you can't find your own pecker to piss with. like
you  don't  even  have  a  body.  serious  spooky.  you  just  go  with  the
vapors—the fog sort of takes you in ... and the sounds, man. the sounds
carry forever. you hear stuff nobody should overhear."

sanders was quiet for a second, just working the yo-yo, then he smiled

at me.



"so  after  a  couple  days  the  guys  start  hearing  this  real  soft,  kind  of
wacked-out  music.  weird  echoes  and  stuff.  like  a  radio  or  something,
but it's not a radio, it's this strange gook music that comes right out of
the rocks. faraway, sort of, but right up close, too. they try to ignore it.
but it's a listening post, right? so they listen. and every night they keep
hearing that crazyass gook concert. all kinds of chimes and xylophones. i
mean, this is wilderness—no way, it can't be real—but there it is, like the
mountains  are  tuned  in  to  radio  fucking  hanoi.  naturally  they  get
nervous. one guy sticks juicy fruit in his ears. another guy almost flips.
thing is, though, they can't report music. they can't get on the horn and
call back to base and say, 'hey, listen, we need some firepower, we got to
blow away this weirdo gook rock band.' they can't do that. it wouldn't go
down. so they lie there in the fog and keep their mouths shut. and what
makes it extra bad, see, is the poor dudes can't horse around like normal.
can't  joke  it  away.  can't  even  talk  to  each  other  except  maybe  in
whispers, all hush-hush, and that just revs up the willies. all they do is
listen."

again  there  was  some  silence  as  mitchell  sanders  looked  out  on  the
river. the dark was coming on hard now, and off to the west i could see
the mountains rising in silhouette, all the mysteries and unknowns.

"this next part," sanders said quietly, "you won't believe."
"probably not," i said.
"you  won't.  and  you  know  why?"  he  gave  me  a  long,  tired  smile.

"because it happened. because every word is absolutely dead-on true."

sanders made a sound in his throat, like a sigh, as if to say he didn't
care if i believed him or not. but he did care. he wanted me to feel the
truth, to believe by the raw force of feeling. he seemed sad, in a way.

"these  six  guys,"  he  said,  "they're  pretty  fried  out  by  now,  and  one
night  they  start  hearing  voices.  like  at  a  cocktail  party.  that's  what  it
sounds  like,  this  big  swank  gook  cocktail  party  somewhere  out  there  in
the fog. music and chitchat and stuff. it's crazy, i know, but they hear the
champagne corks. they hear the actual martini glasses. real hoity-toity,
all very civilized, except this isn't civilization. this is nam.

"anyway,  the  guys  try  to  be  cool.  they  just  lie  there  and  groove,  but
after  a  while  they  start  hearing—you  won't  believe  this—they  hear
chamber  music.  they  hear  violins  and  cellos.  they  hear  this  terrific
mama-san soprano. then after a while they hear gook opera and a glee
club  and  the  haiphong  boys  choir  and  a  barbershop  quartet  and  all



kinds of weird chanting and buddha-buddha stuff. and the whole time,
in  the  background,  there's  still  that  cocktail  party  going  on.  all  these
different voices. not human voices, though. because it's the mountains.
follow me? the rock—it's talking. and the fog, too, and the grass and the
goddamn  mongooses.  everything  talks.  the  trees  talk  politics,  the
monkeys  talk  religion.  the  whole  country.  vietnam.  the  place  talks.  it
talks. understand? nam—it truly talks.

"the  guys  can't  cope.  they  lose  it.  they  get  on  the  radio  and  report
enemy  movement—a  whole  army,  they  say—and  they  order  up  the
firepower. they get arty and gunships. they call in air strikes. and i'll tell
you, they fuckin' crash that cocktail party. all night long, they just smoke
those mountains. they make jungle juice. they blow away trees and glee
clubs  and  whatever  else  there  is  to  blow  away.  scorch  time.  they  walk
napalm up and down the ridges. they bring in the cobras and f-4s, they
use willie peter and he and incendiaries. it's all fire. they make those
mountains burn.

"around dawn things finally get quiet. like you never even heard quiet
before.  one  of  those  real  thick,  real  misty  days—just  clouds  and  fog,
they're off in this special zone—and the mountains are absolutely dead-
flat  silent.  like  brigadoon—pure  vapor,  you  know?  everything's  all
sucked up inside the fog. not a single sound, except they still hear it.

"so they pack up and start humping. they head down the mountain,
back to base camp, and when they get there they don't say diddly. they
don't talk. not a word, like they're deaf and dumb. later on this fat bird
colonel  comes  up  and  asks  what  the  hell  happened  out  there.  what'd
they  hear?  why  all  the  ordnance?  the  man's  ragged  out,  he  gets  down
tight  on  their  case.  i  mean,  they  spent  six  trillion  dollars  on  firepower,
and this fatass colonel wants answers, he wants to know what the fuckin'
story is.

"but the guys don't say zip. they just look at him for a while, sort of
funny like, sort of amazed, and the whole war is right there in that stare.
it  says  everything  you  can't  ever  say.  it  says,  man,  you  got  wax  in  your
ears.  it  says,  poor  bastard,  you'll  never  know—wrong  frequency—you
don't even want to hear this. then they salute the fucker and walk away,
because certain stories you don't ever tell."




you  can  tell  a  true  war  story  by  the  way  it  never  seems  to  end.  not
then, not ever. not when mitchell sanders stood up and moved off into
the dark.

it all happened.
even now, at this instant, i remember that yo-yo. in a way, i suppose,
you had to be there, you had to hear it, but i could tell how desperately
sanders wanted me to believe him, his frustration at not quite getting the
details right, not quite pinning down the final and definitive truth.

and  i  remember  sitting  at  my  foxhole  that  night,  watching  the
shadows  of  quang  ngai,  thinking  about  the  coming  day  and  how  we
would cross the river and march west into the mountains, all the ways i
might die, all the things i did not understand.

late in the night mitchell sanders touched my shoulder. "just came to
me,"  he  whispered.  "the  moral,  i  mean.  nobody  listens.  nobody  hears
nothin'.  like  that  fatass  colonel.  the  politicians,  all  the  civilian  types.
your  girlfriend.  my  girlfriend.  everybody's  sweet  little  virgin  girlfriend.
what they need is to go out on lp. the vapors, man. trees and rocks—
you got to listen to your enemy."


and then again, in the morning, sanders came up to me. the platoon
was preparing to move out, checking weapons, going through all the little
rituals that preceded a day's march. already the lead squad had crossed
the river and was filing off toward the west.

"i got a confession to make," sanders said. "last night, man, i had to

make up a few things."

"i know that."
"the glee club. there wasn't any glee club."
"right."
"no opera."
"forget it, i understand."
"yeah,  but  listen,  it's  still  true.  those  six  guys,  they  heard  wicked

sound out there. they heard sound you just plain won't believe."

sanders  pulled  on  his  rucksack,  closed  his  eyes  for  a  moment,  then

almost smiled at me. i knew what was coming.

"all right," i said, "what's the moral?"
"forget it."



"no, go ahead."
for  a  long  while  he  was  quiet,  looking  away,  and  the  silence  kept
stretching  out  until  it  was  almost  embarrassing.  then  he  shrugged  and
gave me a stare that lasted all day.

"hear that quiet, man?" he said. "that quiet—just listen. there's your

moral."


in  a  true  war  story,  if  there's  a  moral  at  all,  it's  like  the  thread  that
makes  the  cloth.  you  can't  tease  it  out.  you  can't  extract  the  meaning
without  unraveling  the  deeper  meaning.  and  in  the  end,  really,  there's
nothing much to say about a true war story, except maybe "oh."

true war stories do not generalize. they do not indulge in abstraction

or analysis.

for example: war is hell. as a moral declaration the old truism seems
perfectly true, and yet because it abstracts, because it generalizes, i can't
believe it with my stomach. nothing turns inside.

it comes down to gut instinct. a true war story, if truly told, makes the

stomach believe.


this  one  does  it  for  me.  i've  told  it  before—many  times,  many

versions—but here's what actually happened.

we  crossed  that  river  and  marched  west  into  the  mountains.  on  the
third  day,  curt  lemon  stepped  on  a  booby-trapped  105  round.  he  was
playing catch with rat kiley, laughing, and then he was dead. the trees
were thick; it took nearly an hour to cut an lz for the dustoff.

later,  higher  in  the  mountains,  we  came  across  a  baby  vc  water
buffalo. what it was doing there i don't know—no farms or paddies—but
we chased it down and got a rope around it and led it along to a deserted
village  where  we  set  up  for  the  night.  after  supper  rat  kiley  went  over
and stroked its nose.

he opened up a can of c rations, pork and beans, but the baby buffalo

wasn't interested.

rat shrugged.
he stepped back and shot it through the right front knee. the animal
did  not  make  a  sound.  it  went  down  hard,  then  got  up  again,  and  rat
took careful aim and shot off an ear. he shot it in the hindquarters and in



the little hump at its back. he shot it twice in the flanks. it wasn't to kill;
it was to hurt. he put the rifle muzzle up against the mouth and shot the
mouth  away.  nobody  said  much.  the  whole  platoon  stood  there
watching, feeling all kinds of things, but there wasn't a great deal of pity
for the baby water buffalo. curt lemon was dead. rat kiley had lost his
best friend in the world. later in the week he would write a long personal
letter to the guy's sister, who would not write back, but for now it was a
question of pain. he shot off the tail. he shot away chunks of meat below
the ribs. all around us there was the smell of smoke and filth and deep
greenery,  and  the  evening  was  humid  and  very  hot.  rat  went  to
automatic. he shot randomly, almost casually, quick little spurts in the
belly and butt. then he reloaded, squatted down, and shot it in the left
front knee. again the animal fell hard and tried to get up, but this time it
couldn't quite make it. it wobbled and went down sideways. rat shot it in
the  nose.  he  bent  forward  and  whispered  something,  as  if  talking  to  a
pet, then he shot it in the throat. all the while the baby buffalo was silent,
or almost silent, just a light bubbling sound where the nose had been. it
lay very still. nothing moved except the eyes, which were enormous, the
pupils shiny black and dumb.

rat kiley was crying. he tried to say something, but then cradled his

rifle and went off by himself.

the rest of us stood in a ragged circle around the baby buffalo. for a
time  no  one  spoke.  we  had  witnessed  something  essential,  something
brand-new and profound, a piece of the world so startling there was not
yet a name for it.

somebody kicked the baby buffalo.
it was still alive, though just barely, just in the eyes.
"amazing,"  dave  jensen  said.  "my  whole  life,  i  never  seen  anything

like it."

"never?"
"not hardly. not once."
kiowa and mitchell sanders picked up the baby buffalo. they hauled it

across the open square, hoisted it up, and dumped it in the village well.

afterward, we sat waiting for rat to get himself together.
"amazing," dave jensen kept saying. "a new wrinkle. i never seen it

before."



mitchell  sanders  took  out  his  yo-yo.  "well,  that's  nam,"  he  said.

"garden of evil. over here, man, every sin's real fresh and original."


how do you generalize?
war  is  hell,  but  that's  not  the  half  of  it,  because  war  is  also  mystery
and  terror  and  adventure  and  courage  and  discovery  and  holiness  and
pity and despair and longing and love. war is nasty; war is fun. war is
thrilling; war is drudgery. war makes you a man; war makes you dead.

the truths are contradictory. it can be argued, for instance, that war is
grotesque.  but  in  truth  war  is  also  beauty.  for  all  its  horror,  you  can't
help  but  gape  at  the  awful  majesty  of  combat.  you  stare  out  at  tracer
rounds  unwinding  through  the  dark  like  brilliant  red  ribbons.  you
crouch  in  ambush  as  a  cool,  impassive  moon  rises  over  the  nighttime
paddies.  you  admire  the  fluid  symmetries  of  troops  on  the  move,  the
harmonies of sound and shape and proportion, the great sheets of metal-
fire streaming down from a gunship, the illumination rounds, the white
phosphorus, the purply orange glow of napalm, the rocket's red glare. it's
not pretty, exactly. it's astonishing. it fills the eye. it commands you. you
hate  it,  yes,  but  your  eyes  do  not.  like  a  killer  forest  fire,  like  cancer
under a microscope, any battle or bombing raid or artillery barrage has
the  aesthetic  purity  of  absolute  moral
indifference—a  powerful,
implacable  beauty—and  a  true  war  story  will  tell  the  truth  about  this,
though the truth is ugly.

to  generalize  about  war  is  like  generalizing  about  peace.  almost
everything is true. almost nothing is true. at its core, perhaps, war is just
another name for death, and yet any soldier will tell you, if he tells the
truth, that proximity to death brings with it a corresponding proximity to
life. after a firefight, there is always the immense pleasure of aliveness.
the trees are alive. the grass, the soil—everything. all around you things
are  purely  living,  and  you  among  them,  and  the  aliveness  makes  you
tremble.  you  feel  an  intense,  out-of-the-skin  awareness  of  your  living
self—your truest self, the human being you want to be and then become
by the force of wanting it. in the midst of evil you want to be a good man.
you  want  decency.  you  want  justice  and  courtesy  and  human  concord,
things you never knew you wanted. there is a kind of largeness to it, a
kind  of  godliness.  though  it's  odd,  you're  never  more  alive  than  when
you're almost dead. you recognize what's valuable. freshly, as if for the
first time, you love what's best in yourself and in the world, all that might



be lost. at the hour of dusk you sit at your foxhole and look out on a wide
river turning pinkish red, and at the mountains beyond, and although in
the morning you must cross the river and go into the mountains and do
terrible things and maybe die, even so, you find yourself studying the fine
colors on the river, you feel wonder and awe at the setting of the sun, and
you  are  filled  with  a  hard,  aching  love  for  how  the  world  could  be  and
always should be, but now is not.

mitchell sanders was right. for the common soldier, at least, war has
the  feel—the  spiritual  texture—of  a  great  ghostly  fog,  thick  and
permanent.  there  is  no  clarity.  everything  swirls.  the  old  rules  are  no
longer  binding,  the  old  truths  no  longer  true.  right  spills  over  into
wrong. order blends into chaos, love into hate, ugliness into beauty, law
into anarchy, civility into savagery. the vapors suck you in. you can't tell
where  you  are,  or  why  you're  there,  and  the  only  certainty  is
overwhelming ambiguity.

in  war  you  lose  your  sense  of  the  definite,  hence  your  sense  of  truth
itself, and therefore it's safe to say that in a true war story nothing is ever
absolutely true.


often  in  a  true  war  story  there  is  not  even  a  point,  or  else  the  point
doesn't hit you until twenty years later, in your sleep, and you wake up
and  shake  your  wife  and  start  telling  the  story  to  her,  except  when  you
get to the end you've forgotten the point again. and then for a long time
you lie there watching the story happen in your head. you listen to your
wife's  breathing.  the  war's  over.  you  close  your  eyes.  you  smile  and
think, christ, what's the point?


this one wakes me up.
in  the  mountains  that  day,  i  watched  lemon  turn  sideways.  he
laughed  and  said  something  to  rat  kiley.  then  he  took  a  peculiar  half
step, moving from shade into bright sunlight, and the booby-trapped 105
round blew him into a tree. the parts were just hanging there, so dave
jensen and i were ordered to shinny up and peel him off. i remember the
white bone of an arm. i remember pieces of skin and something wet and
yellow that must've been the intestines. the gore was horrible, and stays
with  me.  but  what  wakes  me  up  twenty  years  later  is  dave  jensen
singing "lemon tree" as we threw down the parts.





you can tell a true war story by the questions you ask. somebody tells
a  story,  let's  say,  and  afterward  you  ask,  "is  it  true?"  and  if  the  answer
matters, you've got your answer.

for  example,  we've  all  heard  this  one.  four  guys  go  down  a  trail.  a
grenade sails out. one guy jumps on it and takes the blast and saves his
three buddies.

is it true?
the answer matters.
you'd feel cheated if it never happened. without the grounding reality,
it's just a trite bit of puffery, pure hollywood, untrue in the way all such
stories  are  untrue.  yet  even  if  it  did  happen—and  maybe  it  did,
anything's possible—even then you know it can't be true, because a true
war story does not depend upon that kind of truth. absolute occurrence
is irrelevant. a thing may happen and be a total lie; another thing may
not happen and be truer than the truth. for example: four guys go down
a trail. a grenade sails out. one guy jumps on it and takes the blast, but
it's a killer grenade and everybody dies anyway. before they die, though,
one  of  the  dead  guys  says,  "the  fuck  you  do  that  for?"  and  the  jumper
says, "story of my life, man," and the other guy starts to smile but he's
dead. that's a true story that never happened.


twenty years later, i can still see the sunlight on lemon's face. i can
see him turning, looking back at rat kiley, then he laughed and took that
curious half step from shade into sunlight, his face suddenly brown and
shining,  and  when  his  foot  touched  down,  in  that  instant,  he  must've
thought it was the sunlight that was killing him. it was not the sunlight.
it was a rigged 105 round. but if i could ever get the story right, how the
sun seemed to gather around him and pick him up and lift him high into
a tree, if i could somehow re-create the fatal whiteness of that light, the
quick glare, the obvious cause and effect, then you would believe the last
thing curt lemon believed, which for him must've been the final truth.


now  and  then,  when  i  tell  this  story,  someone  will  come  up  to  me
afterward and say she liked it. it's always a woman. usually it's an older
woman  of  kindly  temperament  and  humane  politics.  she'll  explain  that
as a rule she hates war stories; she can't understand why people want to



wallow in all the blood and gore. but this one she liked. the poor baby
buffalo, it made her sad. sometimes, even, there are little tears. what i
should do, she'll say, is put it all behind me. find new stories to tell.

i won't say it but i'll think it.
i'll picture rat kiley's face, his grief, and i'll think, you dumb cooze.
because she wasn't listening.
it wasn't a war story. it was a love story.
but you can't say that. all you can do is tell it one more time, patiently,
adding and subtracting, making up a few things to get at the real truth.
no  mitchell  sanders,  you  tell  her.  no  lemon,  no  rat  kiley.  no  trail
junction.  no  baby  buffalo.  no  vines  or  moss  or  white  blossoms.
beginning to end, you tell her, it's all made up. every goddamn detail—
the mountains and the river and especially that poor dumb baby buffalo.
none  of  it  happened.  none  of  it.  and  even  if  it  did  happen,  it  didn't
happen  in  the  mountains,  it  happened  in  this  little  village  on  the
batangan  peninsula,  and  it  was  raining  like  crazy,  and  one  night  a  guy
named stink harris woke up screaming with a leech on his tongue. you
can tell a true war story if you just keep on telling it.

and  in  the  end,  of  course,  a  true  war  story  is  never  about  war.  it's
about  sunlight.  it's  about  the  special  way  that  dawn  spreads  out  on  a
river  when  you  know  you  must  cross  the  river  and  march  into  the
mountains  and  do  things  you  are  afraid  to  do.  it's  about  love  and
memory.  it's  about  sorrow.  it's  about  sisters  who  never  write  back  and
people who never listen.

the dentist


when  curt  lemon  was  killed,  i  found  it  hard  to  mourn.  i  knew  him
only  slightly,  and  what  i  did  know  was  not  impressive.  he  had  a
tendency to play the tough soldier role, always posturing, always puffing
himself up, and on occasion he took it way too far. it's true that he pulled
off some dangerous stunts, even a few that seemed plain crazy, like the
time he painted up his body and put on a ghost mask and went out trick-
or-treating  on  halloween.  but  afterward  he  couldn't  stop  bragging.  he
kept  replaying  his  own  exploits,  tacking  on  little  flourishes  that  never
happened.  he  had  an  opinion  of  himself,  i  think,  that  was  too  high  for



his own good. or maybe it was the reverse. maybe it was a low opinion
that he kept trying to erase.

in any case, it's easy to get sentimental about the dead, and to guard

against that i want to tell a quick curt lemon story.

in february we were working an area of operations called the rocket
pocket, which got its name from the fact that the enemy sometimes used
the place to launch rocket attacks on the airfield at chu lai. but for us it
was  like  a  two-week  vacation.  the  ao  lay  along  the  south  china  sea,
where things had the feel of a resort, with white beaches and palm trees
and friendly little villages. it was a quiet time. no casualties, no contact
at all. as usual, though, the higher-ups couldn't leave well enough alone,
and one afternoon an army dentist was choppered in to check our teeth
and do minor repair work. he was a tall, skinny young captain with bad
breath. for a half hour he lectured us on oral hygiene, demonstrating the
proper  flossing  and  brushing  techniques,  then  afterward  he  opened  up
shop  in  a  small  field  tent  and  we  all  took  turns  going  in  for  personal
exams.  at  best  it  was  a  very  primitive  setup.  there  was  a  battery-
powered  drill,  a  canvas  cot,  a  bucket  of  sea  water  for  rinsing,  a  metal
suitcase  full  of  the  various  instruments.  it  amounted  to  assembly-line
dentistry,  quick  and  impersonal,  and  the  young  captain's  main  concern
seemed to be the clock.

as  we  sat  waiting,  curt  lemon  began  to  tense  up.  he  kept  fidgeting,
playing with his dog tags. finally somebody asked what the problem was,
and lemon looked down at his hands and said that back in high school
he'd had a couple of bad experiences with dentists. real sadism, he said.
torture  chamber  stuff.  he  didn't  mind  blood  or  pain—he  actually
enjoyed combat—but there was something about a dentist that just gave
him  the  creeps.  he  glanced  over  at  the  field  tent  and  said,  "no  way.
count me out. nobody messes with these teeth."

but  a  few  minutes  later,  when  the  dentist  called  his  name,  lemon

stood up and walked into the tent.

it was over fast. he fainted even before the man touched him.
four of us had to hoist him up and lay him on the cot. when he came
to,  there  was  a  funny  new  look  on  his  face,  almost  sheepish,  as  if  he'd
been caught committing some terrible crime. he wouldn't talk to anyone.
for the rest of the day he stayed off by himself, sitting alone under a tree,
just  staring  down  at  the  field  tent.  he  seemed  a  little  dazed.  now  and
then  we  could  hear  him  cussing,  bawling  himself  out.  anyone  else



would've  laughed  it  off,  but  for  curt  lemon  it  was  too  much.  the
embarrassment  must've  turned  a  screw  in  his  head.  late  that  night  he
crept down to the dental tent. he switched on a flashlight, woke up the
young  captain,  and  told  him  he  had  a  monster  toothache.  a  killer,  he
said—like  a  nail  in  his  jaw.  the  dentist  couldn't  find  any  problem,  but
lemon  kept  insisting,  so  the  man  finally  shrugged  and  shot  in  the
novocain and yanked out a perfectly good tooth. there was some pain,
no doubt, but in the morning curt lemon was all smiles.

sweetheart of the song tra bong


vietnam  was  full  of  strange  stories,  some  improbable,  some  well
beyond that, but the stories that will last forever are those that swirl back
and forth across the border between trivia and bedlam, the mad and the
mundane. this one keeps returning to me. i heard it from rat kiley, who
swore  up  and  down  to  its  truth,  although  in  the  end,  i'll  admit,  that
doesn't  amount  to  much  of  a  warranty.  among  the  men  in  alpha
company,  rat  had  a  reputation  for  exaggeration  and  overstatement,  a
compulsion  to  rev  up  the  facts,  and  for  most  of  us  it  was  normal
procedure to discount sixty or seventy percent of anything he had to say.
if rat told you, for example, that he'd slept with four girls one night, you
could figure it was about a girl and a half. it wasn't a question of deceit.
just the opposite: he wanted to heat up the truth, to make it burn so hot
that you would feel exactly what he felt. for rat kiley, i think, facts were
formed by sensation, not the other way around, and when you listened to
one  of  his  stories,  you'd  find  yourself  performing  rapid  calculations  in
your  head,  subtracting  superlatives,  figuring  the  square  root  of  an
absolute and then multiplying by maybe.

still, with this particular story, rat never backed down. he claimed to
have  witnessed  the  incident  with  his  own  eyes,  and  i  remember  how
upset he became one morning when mitchell sanders challenged him on
its basic premise.

"it can't happen," sanders said. "nobody ships his honey over to nam.
it  don't  ring  true.  i  mean,  you  just  can't  import  your  own  personal
poontang."

rat shook his head. "i saw it, man. i was right there. this guy did it."



"his girlfriend?"
"straight on. it's a fact." rat's voice squeaked a little. he paused and
looked at his hands. "listen, the guy sends her the money. flies her over.
this cute blonde—just a kid, just barely out of high school—she shows up
with a suitcase and one of those plastic cosmetic bags. comes right out to
the  boonies.  i  swear  to  god,  man,  she's  got  on  culottes.  white  culottes
and this sexy pink sweater. there she is."

i remember mitchell sanders folding his arms. he looked over at me
for a second, not quite grinning, not saying a word, but i could read the
amusement in his eyes.

rat saw it, too.
"no lie," he muttered. "culottes."



when he first arrived in-country, before joining alpha company, rat
had  been  assigned  to  a  small  medical  detachment  up  in  the  mountains
west  of  chu  lai,  near  the  village  of  tra  bong,  where  along  with  eight
other enlisted men he ran an aid station that provided basic emergency
and trauma care. casualties were flown in by helicopter, stabilized, then
shipped  out  to  hospitals  in  chu  lai  or  danang.  it  was  gory  work,  rat
said, but predictable. amputations, mostly—legs and feet. the area was
heavily mined, thick with bouncing betties and homemade booby traps.
for  a  medic,  though,  it  was  ideal  duty,  and  rat  counted  himself  lucky.
there was plenty of cold beer, three hot meals a day, a tin roof over his
head.  no  humping  at  all.  no  officers,  either.  you  could  let  your  hair
grow, he said, and you didn't have to polish your boots or snap off salutes
or  put  up  with  the  usual  rear-echelon  nonsense.  the  highest  ranking
nco was an e-6 named eddie diamond, whose pleasures ran from dope
to darvon, and except for a rare field inspection there was no such thing
as military discipline.

as  rat  described  it,  the  compound  was  situated  at  the  top  of  a  flat-
crested hill along the northern outskirts of tra bong. at one end was a
small dirt helipad; at the other end, in a rough semicircle, the mess hall
and  medical  hootches  overlooked  a  river  called  the  song  tra  bong.
surrounding  the  place  were  tangled  rolls  of  concertina  wire,  with
bunkers and reinforced firing positions at staggered intervals, and base
security was provided by a mixed unit of rfs, pfs, and arvn infantry.
which is to say virtually no security at all. as soldiers, the arvns were
useless; the ruff-and-puffs were outright dangerous. and yet even with



decent troops the place was clearly indefensible. to the north and west
the country rose up in thick walls of wilderness, triple-canopied jungle,
mountains unfolding into higher mountains, ravines and gorges and fast-
moving  rivers  and  waterfalls  and  exotic  butterflies  and  steep  cliffs  and
smoky  little  hamlets  and  great  valleys  of  bamboo  and  elephant  grass.
originally,  in  the  early  1960s,  the  place  had  been  set  up  as  a  special
forces outpost, and when rat kiley arrived nearly a decade later, a squad
of six green berets still used the compound as a base of operations. the
greenies were not social animals. animals, rat said, but far from social.
they  had  their  own  hootch  at  the  edge  of  the  perimeter,  fortified  with
sandbags  and  a  metal  fence,  and  except  for  the  bare  essentials  they
avoided contact with the medical detachment. secretive and suspicious,
loners by nature, the six greenies would sometimes vanish for days at a
time, or even weeks, then late in the night they would just as magically
reappear,  moving  like  shadows  through  the  moonlight,  filing  in  silently
from the dense rain forest off to the west. among the medics there were
jokes about this, but no one asked questions.

while the outpost was isolated and vulnerable, rat said, he always felt
a curious sense of safety there. nothing much ever happened. the place
was  never  mortared,  never  taken  under  fire,  and  the  war  seemed  to  be
somewhere far away. on occasion, when casualties came in, there were
quick  spurts  of  activity,  but  otherwise  the  days  flowed  by  without
incident, a smooth and peaceful time. most mornings were spent on the
volleyball court. in the heat of midday the men would head for the shade,
lazing  away  the  long  afternoons,  and  after  sundown  there  were  movies
and card games and sometimes all-night drinking sessions.

it  was  during  one  of  those  late  nights  that  eddie  diamond  first
brought  up  the  tantalizing  possibility.  it  was  an  offhand  comment.  a
joke, really. what they should do, eddie said, was pool some bucks and
bring  in  a  few  mama-sans  from  saigon,  spice  things  up,  and  after  a
moment one of the men laughed and said, "our own little em club," and
somebody  else  said,  "hey,  yeah,  we  pay  our  fuckin'  dues,  don't  we?"  it
was nothing serious. just passing time, playing with the possibilities, and
so  for  a  while  they  tossed  the  idea  around,  how  you  could  actually  get
away with it, no officers or anything, nobody to clamp down, then they
dropped the subject and moved on to cars and baseball.

later  in  the  night,  though,  a  young  medic  named  mark  fossie  kept

coming back to the subject.



"look,  if  you  think  about  it,"  he  said,  "it's  not  that  crazy.  you  could

actually do it."

"do what?" rat said.
"you know. bring in a girl. i mean, what's the problem?"
rat shrugged. "nothing. a war."
"well, see, that's the thing," mark fossie said. "no war here. you could

really do it. a pair of solid brass balls, that's all you'd need."

there was some laughter, and eddie diamond told him he'd best strap
down  his  dick,  but  fossie  just  frowned  and  looked  at  the  ceiling  for  a
while and then went off to write a letter.

six weeks later his girlfriend showed up.
the  way  rat  told  it,  she  came  in  by  helicopter  along  with  the  daily
resupply shipment out of chu lai. a tall, big-boned blonde. at best, rat
said, she was seventeen years old, fresh out of cleveland heights senior
high.  she  had  long  white  legs  and  blue  eyes  and  a  complexion  like
strawberry ice cream. very friendly, too.

at  the  helipad  that  morning,  mark  fossie  grinned  and  put  his  arm

around her and said, "guys, this is mary anne."

the girl seemed tired and somewhat lost, but she smiled.
there was a heavy silence. eddie diamond, the ranking nco, made a
small motion with his hand, and some of the others murmured a word or
two, then they watched mark fossie pick up her suitcase and lead her by
the arm down to the hootches. for a long while the men were quiet.

"that fucker," somebody finally said.
at  evening  chow  mark  fossie  explained  how  he'd  set  it  up.  it  was
expensive, he admitted, and the logistics were complicated, but it wasn't
like  going  to  the  moon.  cleveland  to  los  angeles,  la  to  bangkok,
bangkok  to  saigon.  she'd  hopped  a  c-130  up  to  chu  lai  and  stayed
overnight at the uso and the next morning hooked a ride west with the
resupply chopper.

"a cinch," fossie said, and gazed down at his pretty girlfriend. "thing

is, you just got to want it enough."

mary anne bell and mark fossie had been sweethearts since grammar
school. from the sixth grade on they had known for a fact that someday
they  would  be  married,  and  live  in  a  fine  gingerbread  house  near  lake
erie,  and  have  three  healthy  yellow-haired  children,  and  grow  old



together,  and  no  doubt  die  in  each  other's  arms  and  be  buried  in  the
same walnut casket. that was the plan. they were very much in love, full
of  dreams,  and  in  the  ordinary  flow  of  their  lives  the  whole  scenario
might well have come true.

on  the  first  night  they  set  up  house  in  one  of  the  bunkers  along  the
perimeter, near the special forces hootch, and over the next two weeks
they  stuck  together  like  a  pair  of  high  school  steadies.  it  was  almost
disgusting,  rat  said,  the  way  they  mooned  over  each  other.  always
holding hands, always laughing over some private joke. all they needed,
he said, were a couple of matching sweaters. but among the medics there
was  some  envy.  it  was  vietnam,  after  all,  and  mary  anne  bell  was  an
attractive  girl.  too  wide  in  the  shoulders,  maybe,  but  she  had  terrific
legs, a bubbly personality, a happy smile. the men genuinely liked her.
out  on  the  volleyball  court  she  wore  cut-off  blue  jeans  and  a  black
swimsuit top, which the guys appreciated, and in the evenings she liked
to dance to music from rat's portable tape deck. there was a novelty to
it; she was good for morale. at times she gave off a kind of come-get-me
energy, coy and flirtatious, but apparently it never bothered mark fossie.
in  fact  he  seemed  to  enjoy  it,  just  grinning  at  her,  because  he  was  so
much  in  love,  and  because  it  was  the  sort  of  show  that  a  girl  will
sometimes put on for her boyfriend's entertainment and education.

though she was young, rat said, mary anne bell was no timid child.
she was curious about things. during her first days in-country she liked
to roam around the compound asking questions: what exactly was a trip
flare?  how  did  a  claymore  work?  what  was  behind  those  scary  green
mountains  to  the  west?  then  she'd  squint  and  listen  quietly  while
somebody filled her in. she had a good quick mind. she paid attention.
often,  especially  during  the  hot  afternoons,  she  would  spend  time  with
the  arvns  out  along  the  perimeter,  picking  up  little  phrases  of
vietnamese,  learning  how  to  cook  rice  over  a  can  of  sterno,  how  to  eat
with her hands. the guys sometimes liked to kid her about it—our own
little  native,  they'd  say—but  mary  anne  would  just  smile  and  stick  out
her tongue. "i'm here," she'd say, "i might as well learn something."

the  war  intrigued  her.  the  land,  too,  and  the  mystery.  at  the
beginning  of  her  second  week  she  began  pestering  mark  fossie  to  take
her  down  to  the  village  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  in  a  quiet  voice,  very
patiently, he tried to tell her that it was a bad idea, way too dangerous,
but mary anne kept after him. she wanted to get a feel for how people



lived, what the smells and customs were. it did not impress her that the
vc owned the place.

"listen, it can't be that bad," she said. "they're human beings, aren't

they? like everybody else?"

fossie nodded. he loved her.
and so in the morning rat kiley and two other medics tagged along as
security while mark and mary anne strolled through the ville like a pair
of  tourists.  if  the  girl  was  nervous,  she  didn't  show  it.  she  seemed
comfortable and entirely at home; the hostile atmosphere did not seem
to register. all morning mary anne chattered away about how quaint the
place  was,  how  she  loved  the  thatched  roofs  and  naked  children,  the
wonderful  simplicity  of  village  life.  a  strange  thing  to  watch,  rat  said.
this  seventeen-year-old  doll  in  her  goddamn  culottes,  perky  and  fresh-
faced,  like  a  cheerleader  visiting  the  opposing  team's  locker  room.  her
pretty blue eyes seemed to glow. she couldn't get enough of it. on their
way  back  up  to  the  compound  she  stopped  for  a  swim  in  the  song  tra
bong,  stripping  down  to  her  underwear,  showing  off  her  legs  while
fossie tried to explain to her about things like ambushes and snipers and
the stopping power of an ak-47.

the guys, though, were impressed.
"a real tiger," said eddie diamond. "d-cup guts, trainer-bra brains."
"she'll learn," somebody said.
eddie diamond gave a solemn nod. "there's the scary part. i promise

you, this girl will most definitely learn."


in parts, at least, it was a funny story, and yet to hear rat kiley tell it
you'd almost think it was intended as straight tragedy. he never smiled.
not even at the crazy stuff. there was always a dark, far-off look in his
eyes,  a  kind  of  sadness,  as  if  he  were  troubled  by  something  sliding
beneath the story's surface. whenever we laughed, i remember, he'd sigh
and wait it out, but the one thing he could not tolerate was disbelief. he'd
get  edgy  if  someone  questioned  one  of  the  details.  "she wasn't  dumb,"
he'd snap. "i never said that. young, that's all i said. like you and me. a
girl,  that's  the  only  difference,  and  i'll  tell  you  something:  it  didn't
amount to jack. i mean, when we first got here—all of us—we were real
young  and  innocent,  full  of  romantic  bullshit,  but  we  learned  pretty
damn quick. and so did mary anne."



rat  would  peer  down  at  his  hands,  silent  and  thoughtful.  after  a

moment his voice would flatten out.

"you  don't  believe  it?"  he'd  say.  "fine  with  me.  but  you  don't  know

human nature. you don't know nam."

then he'd tell us to listen up.



a good sharp mind, rat said. true, she could be silly sometimes, but
she picked up on things fast. at the end of the second week, when four
casualties came in, mary anne wasn't afraid to get her hands bloody. at
times, in fact, she seemed fascinated by it. not the gore so much, but the
adrenaline buzz that went with the job, that quick hot rush in your veins
when the choppers settled down and you had to do things fast and right.
no  time  for  sorting  through  options,  no  thinking  at  all;  you  just  stuck
your hands in and started plugging up holes. she was quiet and steady.
she didn't back off from the ugly cases. over the next day or two, as more
casualties  trickled  in,  she  learned  how  to  clip  an  artery  and  pump  up  a
plastic splint and shoot in morphine. in times of action her face took on a
sudden  new  composure,  almost  serene,  the  fuzzy  blue  eyes  narrowing
into  a  tight,  intelligent  focus.  mark  fossie  would  grin  at  this.  he  was
proud, yes, but also amazed. a different person, it seemed, and he wasn't
sure what to make of it.

other things, too. the way she quickly fell into the habits of the bush.
no cosmetics, no fingernail filing. she stopped wearing jewelry, cut her
hair short and wrapped it in a dark green bandanna. hygiene became a
matter of small consequence. in her second week eddie diamond taught
her  how  to  disassemble  an  m-16,  how  the  various  parts  worked,  and
from  there  it  was  a  natural  progression  to  learning  how  to  use  the
weapon.  for  hours  at  a  time  she  plunked  away  at  c-ration  cans,  a  bit
unsure of herself, but as it turned out she had a real knack for it. there
was a new confidence in her voice, a new authority in the way she carried
herself. in many ways she remained naive and immature, still a kid, but
cleveland heights now seemed very far away.

once or twice, gently, mark fossie suggested that it might be time to
think  about  heading  home,  but  mary  anne  laughed  and  told  him  to
forget it. "everything i want," she said, "is right here."

she stroked his arm, and then kissed him.



on  one  level  things  remained  the  same  between  them.  they  slept
together.  they  held  hands  and  made  plans  for  after  the  war.  but  now
there  was  a  new  imprecision  in  the  way  mary  anne  expressed  her
thoughts  on  certain  subjects.  not  necessarily  three  kids,  she'd  say.  not
necessarily a house on lake erie. "naturally we'll still get married," she'd
tell him, "but it doesn't have to be right away. maybe travel first. maybe
live together. just test it out, you know?"

mark fossie would nod at this, even smile and agree, but it made him
uncomfortable.  he  couldn't  pin  it  down.  her  body  seemed  foreign
somehow—too stiff in places, too firm where the softness used to be. the
bubbliness was gone. the nervous giggling, too. when she laughed now,
which  was  rare,  it  was  only  when  something  struck  her  as  truly  funny.
her  voice  seemed  to  reorganize  itself  at  a  lower  pitch.  in  the  evenings,
while  the  men  played  cards,  she  would  sometimes  fall  into  long  elastic
silences, her eyes fixed on the dark, her arms folded, her foot tapping out
a  coded  message  against  the  floor.  when  fossie  asked  about  it  one
evening,  mary  anne  looked  at  him  for  a  long  moment  and  then
shrugged. "it's nothing," she said. "really nothing. to tell the truth, i've
never been happier in my whole life. never."

twice,  though,  she  came  in  late  at  night.  very  late.  and  then  finally

she did not come in at all.

rat  kiley  heard  about  it  from  fossie  himself.  before  dawn  one
morning,  the  kid  shook  him  awake.  he  was  in  bad  shape.  his  voice
seemed hollow and stuffed up, nasal-sounding, as if he had a bad cold.
he held a flashlight in his hand, clicking it on and off.

"mary anne," he whispered, "i can't find her."
rat sat up and rubbed his face. even in the dim light it was clear that
the  boy  was  in  trouble.  there  were  dark  smudges  under  his  eyes,  the
frayed edges of somebody who hadn't slept in a while.

"gone,"  fossie  said.  "rat,  listen,  she's  sleeping  with  somebody.  last

night, she didn't even ... i don't know what to do."

abruptly then, fossie seemed to collapse. he squatted down, rocking
on his heels, still clutching the flashlight. just a boy—eighteen years old.
tall and blond. a gifted athlete. a nice kid, too, polite and good-hearted,
although for the moment none of it seemed to be serving him well.

he kept clicking the flashlight on and off.



"all  right,  start  at  the  start,"  rat  said.  "nice  and  slow.  sleeping  with

who?"

"i don't know who. eddie diamond."
"eddie?"
"has to be. the guy's always there, always hanging on her."
rat  shook  his  head.  "man,  i  don't  know.  can't  say  it  strikes  a  right

note, not with eddie."

"yes, but he's—"
"easy does it," rat said. he reached out and tapped the boy's shoulder.
"why not just check some bunks? we got nine guys. you and me, that's
two, so there's seven possibles. do a quick body count."

fossie  hesitated.  "but  i  can't.  .  .  if  she's  there,  i  mean,  if  she's  with

somebody—"

"oh, christ."
rat  pushed  himself  up.  he  took  the  flashlight,  muttered  something,
and moved down to the far end of the hootch. for privacy, the men had
rigged up curtained walls around their cots, small makeshift bedrooms,
and in the dark rat went quickly from room to room, using the flashlight
to  pluck  out  the  faces.  eddie  diamond  slept  a  hard  deep  sleep—the
others,  too.  to  be  sure,  though,  rat  checked  once  more,  very  carefully,
then he reported back to fossie.
"all accounted for. no extras."
"eddie?"
"darvon dreams." rat switched off the flashlight and tried to think it
out.  "maybe  she  just—i  don't  know—maybe  she  camped  out  tonight.
under the stars or something. you search the compound?"

"sure i did."
"well, come on," rat said. "one more time."
outside,  a  soft  violet  light  was  spreading  out  across  the  eastern
hillsides. two or three arvn soldiers had built their breakfast fires, but
the  place  was  mostly  quiet  and  unmoving.  they  tried  the  helipad  first,
then the mess hall and supply hootches, then they walked the entire six
hundred meters of perimeter.

"okay," rat finally said. "we got a problem."





when he first told the story, rat stopped there and looked at mitchell

sanders for a time.

"so what's your vote? where was she?"
"the greenies," sanders said.
"yeah?"
sanders  smiled.  "no  other  option.  that  stuff  about  the  special
forces—how they used the place as a base of operations, how they'd glide
in and out—all that had to be there for a reason. that's how stories work,
man."

rat thought about it, then shrugged.
"all  right,  sure,  the  greenies.  but  it's  not  what  fossie  thought.  she
wasn't sleeping with any of them. at least not exactly. i mean, in a way
she  was  sleeping  with all  of  them,  more  or  less,  except  it  wasn't  sex  or
anything. they was just lying together, so to speak, mary anne and these
six grungy weirded-out green berets."

"lying down?" sanders said.
"you got it."
"lying down how?"
rat smiled. "ambush. all night long, man, mary anne's out on fuckin'

ambush."


just  after  sunrise,  rat  said,  she  came  trooping  in  through  the  wire,
tired-looking but cheerful as she dropped her gear and gave mark fossie
a brisk hug. the six green berets did not speak. one of them nodded at
her,  and  the  others  gave  fossie  a  long  stare,  then  they  filed  off  to  their
hootch at the edge of the compound.

"please," she said. "not a word."
fossie took a half step forward and hesitated. it was as though he had
trouble  recognizing  her.  she  wore  a  bush  hat  and  filthy  green  fatigues;
she carried the standard m-16 automatic assault rifle; her face was black
with charcoal.

mary anne handed him the weapon. "i'm exhausted," she said. "we'll

talk later."

she  glanced  over  at  the  special  forces  area,  then  turned  and  walked
quickly across the compound toward her own bunker. fossie stood still
for a few seconds. a little dazed, it seemed. after a moment, though, he



set his jaw and whispered something and went after her with a hard, fast
stride.

"not later!" he yelled. "now!"
what  happened  between  them,  rat  said,  nobody  ever  knew  for  sure.
but in the mess hall that evening it was clear that an accommodation had
been reached. or more likely, he said, it was a case of setting down some
new  rules.  mary  anne's  hair  was  freshly  shampooed.  she  wore  a  white
blouse, a navy blue skirt, a pair of plain black flats. over dinner she kept
her eyes down, poking at her food, subdued to the point of silence. eddie
diamond  and  some  of  the  others  tried  to  nudge  her  into  talking  about
the  ambush—what  was  the  feeling  out  there?  what  exactly  did  she  see
and  hear?—but  the  questions  seemed  to  give  her  trouble.  nervously,
she'd look across the table at fossie. she'd wait a moment, as if to receive
some sort of clearance, then she'd bow her head and mumble out a vague
word or two. there were no real answers.

mark fossie, too, had little to say.
"nobody's  business,"  he  told  rat  that  night.  then  he  offered  a  brief
smile. "one thing for sure, though, there won't be any more ambushes.
no more late nights."

"you laid down the law?"
"compromise,"  fossie  said.  "i'll  put  it  this  way—we're  officially

engaged."

rat nodded cautiously.
"well hey, she'll make a sweet bride," he said. "combat ready."



over the next several days there was a strained, tightly wound quality
to the way they treated each other, a rigid correctness that was enforced
by repetitive acts of willpower. to look at them from a distance, rat said,
you would think they were the happiest two people on the planet. they
spent the long afternoons sunbathing together, stretched out side by side
on  top  of  their  bunker,  or  playing  backgammon  in  the  shade  of  a  giant
palm tree, or just sitting quietly. a model of togetherness, it seemed. and
yet  at  close  range  their  faces  showed  the  tension.  too  polite,  too
thoughtful.  mark  fossie  tried  hard  to  keep  up  a  self-assured  pose,  as  if
nothing  had  ever  come  between  them,  or  ever  could,  but  there  was  a
fragility  to  it,  something  tentative  and  false.  if  mary  anne  happened  to



move a few steps away from him, even briefly, he'd tighten up and force
himself not to watch her. but then a moment later he'd be watching.

in  the  presence  of  others,  at  least,  they  kept  on  their  masks.  over
meals they talked about plans for a huge wedding in cleveland heights—
a  two-day  bash,  lots  of  flowers.  and  yet  even  then  their  smiles  seemed
too intense. they were too quick with their banter; they held hands as if
afraid to let go.

it had to end, and eventually it did.
near the end of the third week fossie began making arrangements to
send  her  home.  at  first,  rat  said,  mary  anne  seemed  to  accept  it,  but
then after a day or two she fell into a restless gloom, sitting off by herself
at  the  edge  of  the  perimeter.  she  would  not  speak.  shoulders  hunched,
her blue eyes opaque, she seemed to disappear inside herself. a couple of
times fossie approached her and tried to talk it out, but mary anne just
stared  out  at  the  dark  green  mountains  to  the  west.  the  wilderness
seemed  to  draw  her  in.  a  haunted  look,  rat  said—partly  terror,  partly
rapture. it was as if she had come up on the edge of something, as if she
were caught in that no-man's-land between cleveland heights and deep
jungle.  seventeen  years  old.  just  a  child,  blond  and  innocent,  but  then
weren't they all?

the next morning she was gone. the six greenies were gone, too.
in  a  way,  rat  said,  poor  fossie  expected  it,  or  something  like  it,  but
that did not help much with the pain. the kid couldn't function. the grief
took him by the throat and squeezed and would not let go.

"lost," he kept whispering.



it was nearly three weeks before she returned. but in a sense she never

returned. not entirely, not all of her.

by  chance,  rat  said,  he  was  awake  to  see  it.  a  damp  misty  night,  he
couldn't  sleep,  so  he'd  gone  outside  for  a  quick  smoke.  he  was  just
standing  there,  he  said,  watching  the  moon,  and  then  off  to  the  west  a
column of silhouettes appeared as if by magic at the edge of the jungle.
at  first  he  didn't  recognize  her—a  small,  soft  shadow  among  six  other
shadows.  there  was  no  sound.  no  real  substance  either.  the  seven
silhouettes  seemed  to  float  across  the  surface  of  the  earth,  like  spirits,
vaporous and unreal. as he watched, rat said, it made him think of some
weird  opium  dream.  the  silhouettes  moved  without  moving.  silently,



one by one, they came up the hill, passed through the wire, and drifted in
a loose file across the compound. it was then, rat said, that he picked out
mary  anne's  face.  her  eyes  seemed  to  shine  in  the  dark—not  blue,
though, but a bright glowing jungle green. she did not pause at fossie's
bunker. she cradled her weapon and moved swiftly to the special forces
hootch and followed the others inside.

briefly,  a  light  came  on,  and  someone  laughed,  then  the  place  went

dark again.


whenever he told the story, rat had a tendency to stop now and then,
interrupting the flow, inserting little clarifications or bits of analysis and
personal opinion. it was a bad habit, mitchell sanders said, because all
that matters is the raw material, the stuff itself, and you can't clutter it up
with  your  own  half-baked  commentary.  that  just  breaks  the  spell.  it
destroys the magic. what you have to do, sanders said, is trust your own
story. get the hell out of the way and let it tell itself.

but rat kiley couldn't help it. he wanted to bracket the full range of

meaning.

"i know it sounds far-out," he'd tell us, "but it's not like impossible or
anything. we all heard plenty of wackier stories. some guy comes back
from the bush, tells you he saw the virgin mary out there, she was riding
a  goddamn  goose  or  something.  everybody  buys  it.  everybody  smiles
and  asks  how  fast  was  they  going,  did  she  have  spurs  on.  well,  it's  not
like that. this mary anne wasn't no virgin but at least she was real. i saw
it. when she came in through the wire that night, i was right there, i saw
those eyes of hers, i saw how she wasn't even the same person no more.
what's  so  impossible  about  that?  she  was  a  girl,  that's  all.  i  mean,  if  it
was  a  guy,  everybody'd  say,  hey,  no  big  deal,  he  got  caught  up  in  the
nam  shit,  he  got  seduced  by  the  greenies.  see  what  i  mean?  you  got
these  blinders  on  about  women.  how  gentle  and  peaceful  they  are.  all
that crap about how if we had a pussy for president there wouldn't be no
more wars. pure garbage. you got to get rid of that sexist attitude."

rat  would  go  on  like  that  until  mitchell  sanders  couldn't  tolerate  it

any longer. it offended his inner ear.

"the  story,"  sanders  would  say.  "the  whole  tone,  man,  you're

wrecking it."

"tone?"



"the  sound.  you  need  to  get  a  consistent  sound,  like  slow  or  fast,
funny or sad. all these digressions, they just screw up your story's sound.
stick to what happened."

frowning, rat would close his eyes.
"tone?"  he'd  say.  "i  didn't  know  it  was  all  that  complicated.  the  girl

joined the zoo. one more animal—end of story."

"yeah, fine. but tell it right."



at daybreak the next morning, when mark fossie heard she was back,
he  stationed  himself  outside  the  fenced-off  special  forces  area.  all
morning he waited for her, and all afternoon. around dusk rat brought
him something to eat.

"she has to come out," fossie said. "sooner or later, she has to."
"or else what?" rat said.
"i go get her. i bring her out."
rat shook his head. "your decision. i was you, though, no way i'd mess

around with any greenie types, not for nothing."

"it's mary anne in there."
"sure, i know that. all the same, i'd knock real extra super polite."
even with the cooling night air fossie's face was slick with sweat. he
looked  sick.  his  eyes  were  bloodshot;  his  skin  had  a  whitish,  almost
colorless cast. for a few minutes rat waited with him, quietly watching
the hootch, then he patted the kid's shoulder and left him alone.

it was after midnight when rat and eddie diamond went out to check
on him. the night had gone cold and steamy, a low fog sliding down from
the mountains, and somewhere out in the dark they heard music playing.
not  loud  but  not  soft  either.  it  had  a  chaotic,  almost  unmusical  sound,
without  rhythm  or  form  or  progression,  like  the  noise  of  nature.  a
synthesizer,  it  seemed,  or  maybe  an  electric  organ.  in  the  background,
just  audible,  a  woman's  voice  was  half  singing,  half  chanting,  but  the
lyrics seemed to be in a foreign tongue.

they  found  fossie  squatting  near  the  gate  in  front  of  the  special
forces area. head bowed, he was swaying to the music, his face wet and
shiny. as eddie bent down beside him, the kid looked up with dull eyes,
ashen and powdery, not quite in register.

"hear that?" he whispered. "you hear? it's mary anne."



eddie diamond took his arm. "let's get you inside. somebody's radio,

that's all it is. move it now."
"mary anne. just listen."
"sure, but—"
"listen!"
fossie suddenly pulled away, twisting sideways, and fell back against
the  gate.  he  lay  there  with  his  eyes  closed.  the  music—the  noise,
whatever it was—came from the hootch beyond the fence. the place was
dark  except  for  a  small  glowing  window,  which  stood  partly  open,  the
panes  dancing  in  bright  reds  and  yellows  as  though  the  glass  were  on
fire. the chanting seemed louder now. fiercer, too, and higher pitched.

fossie pushed himself up. he wavered for a moment then forced the

gate open.

"that voice," he said. "mary anne."
rat took a step forward, reaching out for him, but fossie was already
moving  fast  toward  the  hootch.  he  stumbled  once,  caught  himself,  and
hit the door hard with both arms. there was a noise—a short screeching
sound, like a cat—and the door swung in and fossie was framed there for
an  instant,  his  arms  stretched  out,  then  he  slipped  inside.  after  a
moment rat and eddie followed quietly. just inside the door they found
fossie bent down on one knee. he wasn't moving.

across  the  room  a  dozen  candles  were  burning  on  the  floor  near  the
open  window.  the  place  seemed  to  echo  with  a  weird  deep-wilderness
sound—tribal music—bamboo flutes and drums and chimes. but what hit
you  first,  rat  said,  was  the  smell.  two  kinds  of  smells.  there  was  a
topmost  scent  of  joss  sticks  and  incense,  like  the  fumes  of  some  exotic
smokehouse,  but  beneath  the  smoke  lay  a  deeper  and  much  more
powerful  stench.  impossible  to  describe,  rat  said.  it  paralyzed  your
lungs.  thick  and  numbing,  like  an  animal's  den,  a  mix  of  blood  and
scorched  hair  and  excrement  and  the  sweet-sour  odor  of  moldering
flesh—the stink of the kill. but that wasn't all. on a post at the rear of the
hootch  was  the  decayed  head  of  a  large  black  leopard;  strips  of  yellow-
brown  skin  dangled  from  the  overhead  rafters.  and  bones.  stacks  of
bones—all kinds. to one side, propped up against a wall, stood a poster
in neat black lettering: assemble your own gook!!. free sample kit!!. the
images came in a swirl, rat said, and there was no way you could process
it  all.  off  in  the  gloom  a  few  dim  figures  lounged  in  hammocks,  or  on



cots,  but  none  of  them  moved  or  spoke.  the  background  music  came
from a tape deck near the circle of candles, but the high voice was mary
anne's.

after a second mark fossie made a soft moaning sound. he started to

get up but then stiffened.
"mary anne?" he said.
quietly  then,  she  stepped  out  of  the  shadows.  at  least  for  a  moment
she seemed to be the same pretty young girl who had arrived a few weeks
earlier. she was barefoot. she wore her pink sweater and a white blouse
and a simple cotton skirt.

for a long while the girl gazed down at fossie, almost blankly, and in
the candlelight her face had the composure of someone perfectly at peace
with  herself.  it  took  a  few  seconds,  rat  said,  to  appreciate  the  full
change. in part it was her eyes: utterly flat and indifferent. there was no
emotion in her stare, no sense of the person behind it. but the grotesque
part,  he  said,  was  her  jewelry.  at  the  girl's  throat  was  a  necklace  of
human tongues. elongated and narrow, like pieces of blackened leather,
the  tongues  were  threaded  along  a  length  of  copper  wire,  one
overlapping the next, the tips curled upward as if caught in a final shrill
syllable.

briefly, it seemed, the girl smiled at mark fossie.
"there's  no  sense  talking,"  she  said.  "i  know  what  you  think,  but  it's

not... it's not bad."

"bad?" fossie murmured.
"it's not."
in the shadows there was laughter.
one of the greenies sat up and lighted a cigar. the others lay silent.
"you're in a place," mary anne said softly, "where you don't belong."
she moved her hand in a gesture that encompassed not just the hootch
but everything around it, the entire war, the mountains, the mean little
villages, the trails and trees and rivers and deep misted-over valleys.

"you just don't know," she said. "you hide in this little fortress, behind
wire and sandbags, and you don't know what it's all about. sometimes i
want to eat this place. vietnam. i want to swallow the whole country—the
dirt, the death—i just want to eat it and have it there inside me. that's
how  i  feel.  it's  like  .  .  .  this  appetite.  i  get  scared  sometimes—lots  of



times—but it's not bad. you know? i feel close to myself. when i'm out
there at night, i feel close to my own body, i can feel my blood moving,
my skin and my fingernails, everything, it's like i'm full of electricity and
i'm  glowing  in  the  dark—i'm  on  fire  almost—i'm  burning  away  into
nothing—but  it  doesn't  matter  because  i  know  exactly  who  i  am.  you
can't feel like that anywhere else."

all this was said softly, as if to herself, her voice slow and impassive.
she was not trying to persuade. for a few moments she looked at mark
fossie,  who  seemed  to  shrink  away,  then  she  turned  and  moved  back
into the gloom.

there was nothing to be done.
rat  took  fossie's  arm,  helped  him  up,  and  led  him  outside.  in  the
darkness there was that weird tribal music, which seemed to come from
the earth itself, from the deep rain forest, and a woman's voice rising up
in a language beyond translation.

mark fossie stood rigid.
"do something," he whispered. "i can't just let her go like that."
rat listened for a time, then shook his head.
"man, you must be deaf. she's already gone."



rat kiley stopped there, almost in midsentence, which drove mitchell

sanders crazy.

"what next?" he said.
"next?"
"the girl. what happened to her?"
rat  made  a  small,  tired  motion  with  his  shoulders.  "hard  to  tell  for
sure.  maybe  three,  four  days  later  i  got  orders  to  report  here  to  alpha
company. jumped the first chopper out, that's the last i ever seen of the
place. mary anne, too."

mitchell sanders stared at him.
"you can't do that."
"do what?"
"jesus christ, it's against the rules," sanders said.
"against  human  nature.  this  elaborate  story,  you  can't  say,  hey,  by

the way, i don't know the ending. i mean, you got certain obligations."



rat gave a quick smile. "patience, man. up to now, everything i told
you is from personal experience, the exact truth, but there's a few other
things i heard secondhand. thirdhand, actually. from here on it gets to
be ... i don't know what the word is."

"speculation."
"yeah, right." rat looked off to the west, scanning the mountains, as if
expecting  something  to  appear  on  one  of  the  high  ridgelines.  after  a
second he shrugged. "anyhow, maybe two months later i ran into eddie
diamond over in bangkok—i was on r&r, just this fluke thing—and he
told me some stuff i can't vouch for with my own eyes. even eddie didn't
really see it. he heard it from one of the greenies, so you got to take this
with a whole shakerful of salt."

once more, rat searched the mountains, then he sat back and closed

his eyes.

"you know," he said abruptly, "i loved her."
"say again?"
"a lot. we all did, i guess. the way she looked, mary anne made you
think about those girls back home, how clean and innocent they all are,
how they'll never understand any of this, not in a billion years. try to tell
them about it, they'll just stare at you with those big round candy eyes.
they  won't  understand  zip.  it's  like  trying  to  tell  somebody  what
chocolate tastes like."

mitchell sanders nodded. "or shit."
"there  it  is,  you  got  to  taste  it,  and  that's  the  thing  with  mary  anne.
she  was  there.  she  was  up  to  her  eyeballs  in  it.  after  the  war,  man,  i
promise you, you won't find nobody like her."

suddenly, rat pushed up to his feet, moved a few steps away from us,

then stopped and stood with his back turned. he was an emotional guy.

"got  hooked,  i  guess,"  he  said.  "i  loved  her.  so  when  i  heard  from
eddie  about  what  happened,  it  almost  made  me  .  .  .  like  you  say,  it's
pure speculation."

"go on," mitchell sanders said. "finish up."



what  happened  to  her,  rat  said,  was  what  happened  to  all  of  them.
you come over clean and you get dirty and then afterward it's never the
same. a question of degree. some make it intact, some don't make it at



all. for mary anne bell, it seemed, vietnam had the effect of a powerful
drug: that mix of unnamed terror and unnamed pleasure that comes as
the  needle  slips  in  and  you  know  you're  risking  something.  the
endorphins  start  to  flow,  and  the  adrenaline,  and  you  hold  your  breath
and creep quietly through the moonlit nightscapes; you become intimate
with danger; you're in touch with the far side of yourself, as though it's
another hemisphere, and you want to string it out and go wherever the
trip takes you and be host to all the possibilities inside yourself. not bad,
she'd  said.  vietnam  made  her  glow  in  the  dark.  she  wanted  more,  she
wanted to penetrate deeper into the mystery of herself, and after a time
the wanting became needing, which turned then to craving.

according to eddie diamond, who heard it from one of the greenies,
she took a greedy pleasure in night patrols. she was good at it; she had
the moves. all camouflaged up, her face smooth and vacant, she seemed
to flow like water through the dark, like oil, without sound or center. she
went  barefoot.  she  stopped  carrying  a  weapon.  there  were  times,
apparently,  when  she  took  crazy,  death-wish  chances—things  that  even
the greenies balked at. it was as if she were taunting some wild creature
out in the bush, or in her head, inviting it to show itself, a curious game
of  hide-and-go-seek  that  was  played  out  in  the  dense  terrain  of  a
nightmare.  she  was  lost  inside  herself.  on  occasion,  when  they  were
taken  under  fire,  mary  anne  would  stand  quietly  and  watch  the  tracer
rounds  snap  by,  a  little  smile  at  her  lips,  intent  on  some  private
transaction  with  the  war.  other  times  she  would  simply  vanish
altogether—for hours, for days.

and  then  one  morning,  all  alone,  mary  anne  walked  off  into  the

mountains and did not come back.

no body was ever found. no equipment, no clothing. for all he knew,
rat said, the girl was still alive. maybe up in one of the high mountain
villes, maybe with the montagnard tribes. but that was guesswork.

there was an inquiry, of course, and a week-long air search, and for a
time the tra bong compound went crazy with mp and cid types. in the
end,  however,  nothing  came  of  it.  it  was  a  war  and  the  war  went  on.
mark fossie was busted to pfc, shipped back to a hospital in the states,
and  two  months  later  received  a  medical  discharge.  mary  anne  bell
joined the missing.

but the story did not end there. if you believed the greenies, rat said,
mary anne was still somewhere out there in the dark. odd movements,



odd  shapes.  late  at  night,  when  the  greenies  were  out  on  ambush,  the
whole rain forest seemed to stare in at them—a watched feeling—and a
couple  of  times  they  almost  saw  her  sliding  through  the  shadows.  not
quite, but almost. she had crossed to the other side. she was part of the
land. she was wearing her culottes, her pink sweater, and a necklace of
human tongues. she was dangerous. she was ready for the kill.

stockings


henry  dobbins  was  a  good  man,  and  a  superb  soldier,  but
sophistication was not his strong suit. the ironies went beyond him. in
many  ways  he  was  like  america  itself,  big  and  strong,  full  of  good
intentions,  a  roll  of  fat  jiggling  at  his  belly,  slow  of  foot  but  always
plodding  along,  always  there  when  you  needed  him,  a  believer  in  the
virtues of simplicity and directness and hard labor. like his country, too,
dobbins was drawn toward sentimentality.

even now, twenty years later, i can see him wrapping his girlfriend's

pantyhose around his neck before heading out on ambush.

it was his one eccentricity. the pantyhose, he said, had the properties
of  a  good-luck  charm.  he  liked  putting  his  nose  into  the  nylon  and
breathing in the scent of his girlfriend's body; he liked the memories this
inspired; he sometimes slept with the stockings up against his face, the
way  an  infant  sleeps  with  a  flannel  blanket,  secure  and  peaceful.  more
than anything, though, the stockings were a talisman for him. they kept
him  safe.  they  gave  access  to  a  spiritual  world,  where  things  were  soft
and intimate, a place where he might someday take his girlfriend to live.
like many of us in vietnam, dobbins felt the pull of superstition, and he
believed  firmly  and  absolutely  in  the  protective  power  of  the  stockings.
they  were  like  body  armor,  he  thought.  whenever  we  saddled  up  for  a
late-night  ambush,  putting  on  our  helmets  and  flak  jackets,  henry
dobbins  would  make  a  ritual  out  of  arranging  the  nylons  around  his
neck,  carefully  tying  a  knot,  draping  the  two  leg  sections  over  his  left
shoulder.  there  were  some  jokes,  of  course,  but  we  came  to  appreciate
the mystery of it all. dobbins was invulnerable. never wounded, never a
scratch. in august, he tripped a bouncing betty, which failed to detonate.
and a week later he got caught in the open during a fierce little firefight,



no  cover  at  all,  but  he  just  slipped  the  pantyhose  over  his  nose  and
breathed deep and let the magic do its work.

it turned us into a platoon of believers. you don't dispute facts.
but then, near the end of october, his girlfriend dumped him. it was a
hard  blow.  dobbins  went  quiet  for  a  while,  staring  down  at  her  letter,
then after a time he took out the stockings and tied them around his neck
as a comforter.

"no sweat," he said. "the magic doesn't go away."


church


one afternoon, somewhere west of the batangan peninsula, we came
across  an  abandoned  pagoda.  or  almost  abandoned,  because  a  pair  of
monks lived there in a tar paper shack, tending a small garden and some
broken shrines. they spoke almost no english at all. when we dug our
foxholes in the yard, the monks did not seem upset or displeased, though
the  younger  one  performed  a  washing  motion  with  his  hands.  no  one
could decide what it meant. the older monk led us into the pagoda. the
place  was  dark  and  cool,  i  remember,  with  crumbling  walls  and
sandbagged  windows  and  a  ceiling  full  of  holes.  "it's  bad  news,"  kiowa
said.  "you  don't  mess  with  churches."  but  we  spent  the  night  there,
turning  the  pagoda  into  a  little  fortress,  and  then  for  the  next  seven  or
eight days we used the place as a base of operations. it was mostly a very
peaceful time. each morning the two monks brought us buckets of water.
they giggled when we stripped down to bathe; they smiled happily while
we  soaped  up  and  splashed  one  another.  on  the  second  day  the  older
monk  carried  in  a  cane  chair  for  the  use  of  lieutenant  jimmy  cross,
placing it near the altar area, bowing and gesturing for him to sit down.
the old monk seemed proud of the chair, and proud that such a man as
lieutenant cross should be sitting in it. on another occasion the younger
monk  presented  us  with  four  ripe  watermelons  from  his  garden.  he
stood watching until the watermelons were eaten down to the rinds, then
he smiled and made the strange washing motion with his hands.

though they were kind to all of us, the monks took a special liking for

henry dobbins.

"soldier jesus," they'd say, "good soldier jesus."



squatting  quietly  in  the  cool  pagoda,  they  would  help  dobbins
disassemble and clean his machine gun, carefully brushing the parts with
oil.  the  three  of  them  seemed  to  have  an  understanding.  nothing  in
words, just a quietness they shared.

"you  know,"  dobbins  said  to  kiowa  one  morning,  "after  the  war

maybe i'll join up with these guys."

"join how?" kiowa said.
"wear robes. take the pledge."
kiowa thought about it. "that's a new one. i didn't know you were all

that religious."

"well,  i'm  not,"  dobbins  said.  beside  him,  the  two  monks  were
working on the m-60. he watched them take turns running oiled swabs
through the barrel. "i mean, i'm not the churchy type. when i was a little
kid, way back, i used to sit there on sunday counting bricks in the wall.
church wasn't for me. but then in high school, i started to think how i'd
like to be a minister. free house, free car. lots of potlucks. it looked like
a pretty good life."

"you're serious?" kiowa said.
dobbins  shrugged  his  shoulders.  "what's  serious?  i  was  a  kid.  the
thing  is,  i  believed  in  god  and  all  that,  but  it  wasn't  the  religious  part
that interested me. just being nice to people, that's all. being decent."

"right," kiowa said.
"visit sick people, stuff like that. i would've been good at it, too. not
the  brainy  part—not  sermons  and  all  that—but  i'd  be  okay  with  the
people part."

henry  dobbins  was  silent  for  a  time.  he  smiled  at  the  older  monk,

who was now cleaning the machine gun's trigger assembly.

"but  anyway,"  dobbins  said,  "i  couldn't  ever  be  a  real  minister,
because  you  have  to  be  super  sharp.  upstairs,  i  mean.  it  takes  brains.
you  have  to  explain  some  hard  stuff,  like  why  people  die,  or  why  god
invented pneumonia and all that." he shook his head. "i just didn't have
the  smarts  for  it.  and  there's  the  religious  thing,  too.  all  these  years,
man, i still hate church."

"maybe you'd change," kiowa said.
henry dobbins closed his eyes briefly, then laughed.



"one thing for sure, i'd look spiffy in those robes they wear—just like
friar tuck. maybe i'll do it. find a monastery somewhere. wear a robe
and be nice to people."

"sounds good," kiowa said.
the two monks were quiet as they cleaned and oiled the machine gun.
though they spoke almost no english, they seemed to have great respect
for  the  conversation,  as  if  sensing  that  important  matters  were  being
discussed. the younger monk used a yellow cloth to wipe dirt from a belt
of ammunition.

"what about you?" dobbins said.
"how?"
"well,  you  carry  that  bible  everywhere,  you  never  hardly  swear  or

anything, so you must—"

"i grew up that way," kiowa said.
"did you ever—you know—did you think about being a minister?"
"no. not ever."
dobbins laughed. "an indian preacher. man, that's one i'd love to see.

feathers and buffalo robes."

kiowa  lay  on  his  back,  looking  up  at  the  ceiling,  and  for  a  time  he

didn't speak. then he sat up and took a drink from his canteen.

"not  a  minister,"  he  said,  "but  i  do  like  churches.  the  way  it  feels
inside.  it  feels  good  when  you  just  sit  there,  like  you're  in  a  forest  and
everything's really quiet, except there's still this sound you can't hear."

"yeah."
"you ever feel that?"
"sort of."
kiowa made a noise in his throat. "this is all wrong," he said.
"what?"
"setting up here. it's wrong. i don't care what, it's still a church."
dobbins nodded. "true."
"a church," kiowa said. "just wrong."
when  the  two  monks  finished  cleaning  the  machine  gun,  henry
dobbins began reassembling it, wiping off the excess oil, then he handed
each of them a can of peaches and a chocolate bar. "okay," he said, "didi



mau, boys. beat it." the monks bowed and moved out of the pagoda into
the bright morning sunlight.

henry dobbins made the washing motion with his hands.
"you're right," he said. "all you can do is be nice. treat them decent,

you know?"

the man i killed


his jaw was in his throat, his upper lip and teeth were gone, his one
eye  was  shut,  his  other  eye  was  a  star-shaped  hole,  his  eyebrows  were
thin  and  arched  like  a  woman's,  his  nose  was  undamaged,  there  was  a
slight tear at the lobe of one ear, his clean black hair was swept upward
into a cowlick at the rear of the skull, his forehead was lightly freckled,
his  fingernails  were  clean,  the  skin  at  his  left  cheek  was  peeled  back  in
three ragged strips, his right cheek was smooth and hairless, there was a
butterfly on his chin, his neck was open to the spinal cord and the blood
there was thick and shiny and it was this wound that had killed him. he
lay  face-up  in  the  center  of  the  trail,  a  slim,  dead,  almost  dainty  young
man. he had bony legs, a narrow waist, long shapely fingers. his chest
was sunken and poorly muscled—a scholar, maybe. his wrists were the
wrists  of  a  child.  he  wore  a  black  shirt,  black  pajama  pants,  a  gray
ammunition  belt,  a  gold  ring  on  the  third  finger  of  his  right  hand.  his
rubber sandals had been blown off. one lay beside him, the other a few
meters up the trail. he had been born, maybe, in 1946 in the village of
my  khe  near  the  central  coastline  of  quang  ngai  province,  where  his
parents farmed, and where his family had lived for several centuries, and
where,  during  the  time  of  the  french,  his  father  and  two  uncles  and
many neighbors had joined in the struggle for independence. he was not
a communist. he was a citizen and a soldier. in the village of my khe, as
in all of quang ngai, patriotic resistance had the force of tradition, which
was partly the force of legend, and from his earliest boyhood the man i
killed would have listened to stories about the heroic trung sisters and
tran hung dao's famous rout of the mongols and le loi's final victory
against  the  chinese  at  tot  dong.  he  would  have  been  taught  that  to
defend the land was a man's highest duty and highest privilege. he had
accepted  this.  it  was  never  open  to  question.  secretly,  though,  it  also
frightened him. he was not a fighter. his health was poor, his body small



and  frail.  he  liked  books.  he  wanted  someday  to  be  a  teacher  of
mathematics.  at  night,  lying  on  his  mat,  he  could  not  picture  himself
doing the brave things his father had done, or his uncles, or the heroes of
the  stories.  he  hoped  in  his  heart  that  he  would  never  be  tested.  he
hoped  the  americans  would  go  away.  soon,  he  hoped.  he  kept  hoping
and hoping, always, even when he was asleep.

"oh, man, you fuckin' trashed the fucker," azar said. "you scrambled
his sorry self, look at that, you did, you laid him out like shredded fuckin'
wheat."

"go away," kiowa said.
"i'm just saying the truth. like oatmeal."
"go," kiowa said.
"okay, then, i take it back," azar said. he started to move away, then
stopped  and  said,  "rice  krispies,  you  know?  on  the  dead  test,  this
particular individual gets a-plus."

smiling at this, he shrugged and walked up the trail toward the village

behind the trees.

kiowa kneeled down.
"just forget that crud," he said. he opened up his canteen and held it
out for a while and then sighed and pulled it away. "no sweat, man. what
else could you do?"

later, kiowa said, "i'm serious. nothing anybody could do. come on,

stop staring."

the trail junction was shaded by a row of trees and tall brush. the slim
young man lay with his legs in the shade. his jaw was in his throat. his
one eye was shut and the other was a star-shaped hole.

kiowa glanced at the body.
"all  right,  let  me  ask  a  question,"  he  said.  "you  want  to  trade  places

with him? turn it all upside down—you want that? i mean, be honest."

the star-shaped hole was red and yellow. the yellow part seemed to be
getting wider, spreading out at the center of the star. the upper lip and
gum and teeth were gone. the man's head was cocked at a wrong angle,
as if loose at the neck, and the neck was wet with blood.

"think it over," kiowa said.



then  later  he  said,  "tim,  it's  a  war.  the  guy  wasn't  heidi—he  had  a
weapon,  right?  it's  a  tough  thing,  for  sure,  but  you  got  to  cut  out  that
staring."

then he said, "maybe you better lie down a minute."
then after a long empty time he said, "take it slow. just go wherever

the spirit takes you."

the  butterfly  was  making  its  way  along  the  young  man's  forehead,
which  was  spotted  with  small  dark  freckles.  the  nose  was  undamaged.
the  skin  on  the  right  cheek  was  smooth  and  fine-grained  and  hairless.
frail-looking, delicately boned, the young man would not have wanted to
be  a  soldier  and  in  his  heart  would  have  feared  performing  badly  in
battle. even as a boy growing up in the village of my khe, he had often
worried  about  this.  he  imagined  covering  his  head  and  lying  in  a  deep
hole and closing his eyes and not moving until the war was over. he had
no stomach for violence. he loved mathematics. his eyebrows were thin
and arched like a woman's, and at school the boys sometimes teased him
about how pretty he was, the arched eyebrows and long shapely fingers,
and on the playground they mimicked a woman's walk and made fun of
his smooth skin and his love for mathematics. the young man could not
make himself fight them. he often wanted to, but he was afraid, and this
increased  his  shame.  if  he  could  not  fight  little  boys,  he  thought,  how
could  he  ever  become  a  soldier  and  fight  the  americans  with  their
airplanes  and  helicopters  and  bombs?  it  did  not  seem  possible.  in  the
presence of his father and uncles, he pretended to look forward to doing
his patriotic duty, which was also a privilege, but at night he prayed with
his  mother  that  the  war  might  end  soon.  beyond  anything  else,  he  was
afraid of disgracing himself, and therefore his family and village. but all
he  could  do,  he  thought,  was  wait  and  pray  and  try  not  to  grow  up  too
fast.

"listen to me," kiowa said. "you feel terrible, i know that."
then he said, "okay, maybe i don't know."
along  the  trail  there  were  small  blue  flowers  shaped  like  bells.  the
young man's head was wrenched sideways, not quite facing the flowers,
and  even  in  the  shade  a  single  blade  of  sunlight  sparkled  against  the
buckle  of  his  ammunition  belt.  the  left  cheek  was  peeled  back  in  three
ragged  strips.  the  wounds  at  his  neck  had  not  yet  clotted,  which  made
him seem animate even in death, the blood still spreading out across his
shirt.



kiowa shook his head.
there was some silence before he said, "stop staring."
the young man's fingernails were clean. there was a slight tear at the
lobe of one ear, a sprinkling of blood on the forearm. he wore a gold ring
on  the  third  finger  of  his  right  hand.  his  chest  was  sunken  and  poorly
muscled—a  scholar,  maybe.  his  life  was  now  a  constellation  of
possibilities. so, yes, maybe a scholar. and for years, despite his family's
poverty,  the  man  i  killed  would  have  been  determined  to  continue  his
education  in  mathematics.  the  means  for  this  were  arranged,  perhaps,
through the village liberation cadres, and in 1964 the young man began
attending  classes  at  the  university  in  saigon,  where  he  avoided  politics
and paid attention to the problems of calculus. he devoted himself to his
studies. he spent his nights alone, wrote romantic poems in his journal,
took pleasure in the grace and beauty of differential equations. the war,
he knew, would finally take him, but for the time being he would not let
himself think about it. he had stopped praying; instead, now, he waited.
and as he waited, in his final year at the university, he fell in love with a
classmate, a girl of seventeen, who one day told him that his wrists were
like  the  wrists  of  a  child,  so  small  and  delicate,  and  who  admired  his
narrow waist and the cowlick that rose up like a bird's tail at the back of
his  head.  she  liked  his  quiet  manner;  she  laughed  at  his  freckles  and
bony legs. one evening, perhaps, they exchanged gold rings.

now one eye was a star.
"you okay?" kiowa said.
the body lay almost entirely in shade. there were gnats at the mouth,
little flecks of pollen drifting above the nose. the butterfly was gone. the
bleeding had stopped except for the neck wounds.

kiowa  picked  up  the  rubber  sandals,  clapping  off  the  dirt,  then  bent
down to search the body. he found a pouch of rice, a comb, a fingernail
clipper, a few soiled piasters, a snapshot of a young woman standing in
front  of  a  parked  motorcycle.  kiowa  placed  these  items  in  his  rucksack
along with the gray ammunition belt and rubber sandals.

then he squatted down.
"i'll tell you the straight truth," he said. "the guy was dead the second
he stepped on the trail. understand me? we all had him zeroed. a good
kill—weapon, ammunition, everything." tiny beads of sweat glistened at
kiowa's forehead. his eyes moved from the sky to the dead man's body to



the  knuckles  of  his  own  hands.  "so  listen,  you  best  pull  your  shit
together. can't just sit here all day."

later he said, "understand?"
then  he  said,  "five  minutes,  tim.  five  more  minutes  and  we're

moving out."

the  one  eye  did  a  funny  twinkling  trick,  red  to  yellow.  his  head  was
wrenched  sideways,  as  if  loose  at  the  neck,  and  the  dead  young  man
seemed  to  be  staring  at  some  distant  object  beyond  the  bell-shaped
flowers along the trail.

the  blood  at  the  neck  had  gone  to  a  deep  purplish  black.  clean
fingernails, clean hair—he had been a soldier for only a single day. after
his years at the university, the man i killed returned with his new wife to
the village of my khe, where he enlisted as a common rifleman with the
48th  vietcong  battalion.  he  knew  he  would  die  quickly.  he  knew  he
would see a flash of light. he knew he would fall dead and wake up in the
stories of his village and people.

kiowa covered the body with a poncho.
"hey,  you're  looking  better,"  he  said.  "no  doubt  about  it.  all  you

needed was time—some mental r&r."

then he said, "man, i'm sorry."
then later he said, "why not talk about it?"
then he said, "come on, man, talk."
he was a slim, dead, almost dainty young man of about twenty. he lay
with  one  leg  bent  beneath  him,  his  jaw  in  his  throat,  his  face  neither
expressive  nor  inexpressive.  one  eye  was  shut.  the  other  was  a  star-
shaped hole.

"talk," kiowa said.


ambush


when  she  was  nine,  my  daughter  kathleen  asked  if  i  had  ever  killed
anyone. she knew about the war; she knew i'd been a soldier. "you keep
writing  these  war  stories,"  she  said,  "so  i  guess  you  must've  killed
somebody."  it  was  a  difficult  moment,  but  i  did  what  seemed  right,
which was to say, "of course not," and then to take her onto my lap and



hold her for a while. someday, i hope, she'll ask again. but here i want to
pretend  she's  a  grown-up.  i  want  to  tell  her  exactly  what  happened,  or
what i remember happening, and then i want to say to her that as a little
girl she was absolutely right. this is why i keep writing war stories:

he  was  a  short,  slender  young  man  of  about  twenty.  i  was  afraid  of
him—afraid  of  something—and  as  he  passed  me  on  the  trail  i  threw  a
grenade that exploded at his feet and killed him.

or to go back:
shortly after midnight we moved into the ambush site outside my khe.
the  whole  platoon  was  there,  spread  out  in  the  dense  brush  along  the
trail,  and  for  five  hours  nothing  at  all  happened.  we  were  working  in
two-man  teams—one  man  on  guard  while  the  other  slept,  switching  off
every two hours—and i remember it was still dark when kiowa shook me
awake for the final watch. the night was foggy and hot. for the first few
moments i felt lost, not sure about directions, groping for my helmet and
weapon.  i  reached  out  and  found  three  grenades  and  lined  them  up  in
front of me; the pins had already been straightened for quick throwing.
and  then  for  maybe  half  an  hour  i  kneeled  there  and  waited.  very
gradually, in tiny slivers, dawn began to break through the fog, and from
my position in the brush i could see ten or fifteen meters up the trail. the
mosquitoes  were  fierce.  i  remember  slapping  at  them,  wondering  if  i
should wake up kiowa and ask for some repellent, then thinking it was a
bad idea, then looking up and seeing the young man come out of the fog.
he wore black clothing and rubber sandals and a gray ammunition belt.
his  shoulders  were  slightly  stooped,  his  head  cocked  to  the  side  as  if
listening for something. he seemed at ease. he carried his weapon in one
hand, muzzle down, moving without any hurry up the center of the trail.
there  was  no  sound  at  all—none  that  i  can  remember.  in  a  way,  it
seemed,  he  was  part  of  the  morning  fog,  or  my  own  imagination,  but
there  was  also  the  reality  of  what  was  happening  in  my  stomach.  i  had
already pulled the pin on a grenade. i had come up to a crouch. it was
entirely automatic. i did not hate the young man; i did not see him as the
enemy; i did not ponder issues of morality or politics or military duty. i
crouched and kept my head low. i tried to swallow whatever was rising
from  my  stomach,  which  tasted  like  lemonade,  something  fruity  and
sour. i was terrified. there were no thoughts about killing. the grenade
was to make him go away—just evaporate—and i leaned back and felt my
mind  go  empty  and  then  felt  it  fill  up  again.  i  had  already  thrown  the



grenade before telling myself to throw it. the brush was thick and i had
to lob it high, not aiming, and i remember the grenade seeming to freeze
above  me  for  an  instant,  as  if  a  camera  had  clicked,  and  i  remember
ducking down and holding my breath and seeing little wisps of fog rise
from the earth. the grenade bounced once and rolled across the trail. i
did not hear it, but there must've been a sound, because the young man
dropped his weapon and began to run, just two or three quick steps, then
he hesitated, swiveling to his right, and he glanced down at the grenade
and tried to cover his head but never did. it occurred to me then that he
was  about  to  die.  i  wanted  to  warn  him.  the  grenade  made  a  popping
noise—not  soft  but  not  loud  either—not  what  i'd  expected—and  there
was  a  puff  of  dust  and  smoke—a  small  white  puff—and  the  young  man
seemed to jerk upward as if pulled by invisible wires. he fell on his back.
his rubber sandals had been blown off. there was no wind. he lay at the
center  of  the  trail,  his  right  leg  bent  beneath  him,  his  one  eye  shut,  his
other eye a huge star-shaped hole.

it  was  not  a  matter  of  live  or  die.  there  was  no  real  peril.  almost
certainly the young man would have passed by. and it will always be that
way.

later, i remember, kiowa tried to tell me that the man would've died
anyway. he told me that it was a good kill, that i was a soldier and this
was a war, that i should shape up and stop staring and ask myself what
the dead man would' ve done if things were reversed.

none of it mattered. the words seemed far too complicated. all i could

do was gape at the fact of the young man's body.

even now i haven't finished sorting it out. sometimes i forgive myself,
other times i don't. in the ordinary hours of life i try not to dwell on it,
but now and then, when i'm reading a newspaper or just sitting alone in
a room, i'll look up and see the young man coming out of the morning
fog.  i'll  watch  him  walk  toward  me,  his  shoulders  slightly  stooped,  his
head  cocked  to  the  side,  and  he'll  pass  within  a  few  yards  of  me  and
suddenly smile at some secret thought and then continue up the trail to
where it bends back into the fog.

style




there was no music. most of the hamlet had burned down, including
her house, which was now smoke, and the girl danced with her eyes half
closed,  her  feet  bare.  she  was  maybe  fourteen.  she  had  black  hair  and
brown  skin.  "why's  she  dancing?"  azar  said.  we  searched  through  the
wreckage but there wasn't much to find. rat kiley caught a chicken for
dinner. lieutenant cross radioed up to the gunships and told them to go
away. the girl danced mostly on her toes. she took tiny steps in the dirt
in front of her house, sometimes making a slow twirl, sometimes smiling
to  herself.  "why's  she  dancing?"  azar  said,  and  henry  dobbins  said  it
didn't matter why, she just was. later we found her family in the house.
they were dead and badly burned. it wasn't a big family: an infant and
an  old  woman  and  a  woman  whose  age  was  hard  to  tell.  when  we
dragged them out, the girl kept dancing. she put the palms of her hands
against  her  ears,  which  must've  meant  something,  and  she  danced
sideways  for  a  short  while,  and  then  backwards.  she  did  a  graceful
movement with her hips. "well, i don't get it," azar said. the smoke from
the  hootches  smelled  like  straw.  it  moved  in  patches  across  the  village
square,  not  thick  anymore,  sometimes  just  faint  ripples  like  fog.  there
were dead pigs, too. the girl went up on her toes and made a slow turn
and  danced  through  the  smoke.  her  face  had  a  dreamy  look,  quiet  and
composed. a while later, when we moved out of the hamlet, she was still
dancing.  "probably  some  weird  ritual,"  azar  said,  but  henry  dobbins
looked back and said no, the girl just liked to dance.

that  night,  after  we'd  marched  away  from  the  smoking  village,  azar
mocked  the  girl's  dancing.  he  did  funny  jumps  and  spins.  he  put  the
palms of his hands against his ears and danced sideways for a while, and
then  backwards,  and  then  did  an  erotic  thing  with  his  hips.  but  henry
dobbins,  who  moved  gracefully  for  such  a  big  man,  took  azar  from
behind and lifted him up high and carried him over to a deep well and
asked if he wanted to be dumped in.

azar said no.
"all right, then," henry dobbins said, "dance right."


speaking of courage


the war was over and there was no place in particular to go. norman
bowker  followed  the  tar  road  on  its  seven-mile  loop  around  the  lake,



then  he  started  all  over  again,  driving  slowly,  feeling  safe  inside  his
father's  big  chevy,  now  and  then  looking  out  on  the  lake  to  watch  the
boats  and  water-skiers  and  scenery.  it  was  sunday  and  it  was  summer,
and the town seemed pretty much the same. the lake lay flat and silvery
against the sun. along the road the houses were all low-slung and split-
level  and  modern,  with  big  porches  and  picture  windows  facing  the
water. the lawns were spacious. on the lake side of the road, where real
estate  was  most  valuable,  the  houses  were  handsome  and  set  deep  in,
well kept and brightly painted, with docks jutting out into the lake, and
boats  moored  and  covered  with  canvas,  and  neat  gardens,  and
sometimes  even  gardeners,  and  stone  patios  with  barbecue  spits  and
grills, and wooden shingles saying who lived where. on the other side of
the  road,  to  his  left,  the  houses  were  also  handsome,  though  less
expensive  and  on  a  smaller  scale  and  with  no  docks  or  boats  or
gardeners. the road was a sort of boundary between the affluent and the
almost affluent, and to live on the lake side of the road was one of the few
natural  privileges  in  a  town  of  the  prairie—the  difference  between
watching the sun set over cornfields or over water.

it was a graceful, good-sized lake. back in high school, at night, he had
driven around and around it with sally kramer, wondering if she'd want
to  pull  into  the  shelter  of  sunset  park,  or  other  times  with  his  friends,
talking  about  urgent  matters,  worrying  about  the  existence  of  god  and
theories  of  causation.  then,  there  had  not  been  a  war.  but  there  had
always  been  the  lake,  which  was  the  town's  first  cause  of  existence,  a
place for immigrant settlers to put down their loads. before the settlers
were  the  sioux,  and  before  the  sioux  were  the  vast  open  prairies,  and
before the prairies there was only ice. the lake bed had been dug out by
the  southernmost  advance  of  the  wisconsin  glacier.  fed  by  neither
streams  nor  springs,  the  lake  was  often  filthy  and  algaed,  relying  on
fickle  prairie  rains  for  replenishment.  still,  it  was  the  only  important
body  of  water  within  forty  miles,  a  source  of  pride,  nice  to  look  at  on
bright  summer  days,  and  later  that  evening  it  would  color  up  with
fireworks.  now,  in  the  late  afternoon,  it  lay  calm  and  smooth,  a  good
audience  for  silence,  a  seven-mile  circumference  that  could  be  traveled
by  slow  car  in  twenty-five  minutes.  it  was  not  such  a  good  lake  for
swimming.  after  high  school,  he'd  caught  an  ear  infection  that  had
almost kept him out of the war. and the lake had drowned his friend max
arnold, keeping him out of the war entirely. max had been one who liked
to talk about the existence of god. "no, i'm not saying that," he'd argue



against the drone of the engine. "i'm saying it's possible as an idea, even
necessary as an idea, a final cause in the whole structure of causation."
now he knew, perhaps. before the war they'd driven around the lake as
friends,  but  now  max  was  just  an  idea,  and  most  of  norman  bowker's
other friends were living in des moines or sioux city, or going to school
somewhere,  or  holding  down  jobs.  the  high  school  girls  were  mostly
gone or married. sally kramer, whose pictures he had once carried in his
wallet,  was  one  who  had  married.  her  name  was  now  sally  gustafson
and she lived in a pleasant blue house on the less expensive side of the
lake road. on his third day home he'd seen her out mowing the lawn, still
pretty in a lacy red blouse and white shorts. for a moment he'd almost
pulled over, just to talk, but instead he'd pushed down hard on the gas
pedal. she looked happy. she had her house and her new husband, and
there was really nothing he could say to her.

the town seemed remote somehow. sally was remarried and max was

drowned and his father was at home watching baseball on national tv.

norman bowker shrugged. "no problem," he murmured.
clockwise, as if in orbit, he took the chevy on another seven-mile turn

around the lake.

even  in  late  afternoon  the  day  was  hot.  he  turned  on  the  air
conditioner, then the radio, and he leaned back and let the cold air and
music  blow  over  him.  along  the  road,  kicking  stones  in  front  of  them,
two young boys were hiking with knapsacks and toy rifles and canteens.
he honked going by, but neither boy looked up. already he had passed
them  six  times,  forty-two  miles,  nearly  three  hours  without  stop.  he
watched  the  boys  recede  in  his  rearview  mirror.  they  turned  a  soft
grayish color, like sand, before finally disappearing.

he tapped down lightly on the accelerator.
out on the lake a man's motorboat had stalled; the man was bent over
the  engine  with  a  wrench  and  a  frown.  beyond  the  stalled  boat  there
were  other  boats,  and  a  few  water-skiers,  and  the  smooth  july  waters,
and  an  immense  flatness  everywhere.  two  mud  hens  floated  stiffly
beside a white dock.

the road curved west, where the sun had now dipped low. he figured
it was close to five o'clock—twenty after, he guessed. the war had taught
him to tell time without clocks, and even at night, waking from sleep, he
could usually place it within ten minutes either way. what he should do,
he thought, is stop at sally's house and impress her with this new time-



telling  trick  of  his.  they'd  talk  for  a  while,  catching  up  on  things,  and
then  he'd  say,  "well,  better  hit  the  road,  it's  five  thirty-four,"  and  she'd
glance  at  her  wristwatch  and  say,  "hey!  how'd  you  do  that?"  and  he'd
give a casual shrug and tell her it was just one of those things you pick
up. he'd keep it light. he wouldn't say anything about anything. "how's
it being married?" he might ask, and he'd nod at whatever she answered
with, and he would not say a word about how he'd almost won the silver
star for valor.

he  drove  past  slater  park  and  across  the  causeway  and  past  sunset
park.  the  radio  announcer  sounded  tired.  the  temperature  in  des
moines  was  eighty-one  degrees,  and  the  time  was  five  thirty-five,  and
"all you on the road, drive extra careful now on this fine fourth of july."
if  sally  had  not  been  married,  or  if  his  father  were  not  such  a  baseball
fan, it would have been a good time to talk.

"the silver star?" his father might have said.
"yes, but i didn't get it. almost, but not quite."
and his father would have nodded, knowing full well that many brave
men do not win medals for their bravery, and that others win medals for
doing  nothing.  as  a  starting  point,  maybe,  norman  bowker  might  then
have  listed  the  seven  medals  he  did  win:  the  combat  infantryman's
badge,  the  air  medal,  the  army  commendation  medal,  the  good
conduct medal, the vietnam campaign medal, the bronze star, and the
purple heart, though it wasn't much of a wound and did not leave a scar
and did not hurt and never had. he would've explained to his father that
none  of  these  decorations  was  for  uncommon  valor.  they  were  for
common  valor.  the  routine,  daily  stuff—just  humping,  just  enduring—
but that was worth something, wasn't it? yes, it was. worth plenty. the
ribbons looked good on the uniform in his closet, and if his father were
to ask, he would've explained what each signified and how he was proud
of  all  of  them,  especially  the  combat  infantryman's  badge,  because  it
meant  he  had  been  there  as  a  real  soldier  and  had  done  all  the  things
soldiers do, and therefore it wasn't such a big deal that he could not bring
himself to be uncommonly brave.

and  then  he  would  have  talked  about  the  medal  he  did  not  win  and

why he did not win it.

"i almost won the silver star," he would have said.
"how's that?"



"just a story."
"so tell me," his father would have said.
slowly then, circling the lake, norman bowker would have started by
describing the song tra bong. "a river," he would've said, "this slow flat
muddy  river."  he  would've  explained  how  during  the  dry  season  it  was
exactly  like  any  other  river,  nothing  special,  but  how  in  october  the
monsoons began and the whole situation changed. for a solid week the
rains never stopped, not once, and so after a few days the song tra bong
overflowed  its  banks  and  the  land  turned  into  a  deep,  thick  muck  for  a
half mile on either side. just muck—no other word for it. like quicksand,
almost,  except  the  stink  was  incredible.  "you  couldn't  even  sleep,"  he'd
tell  his  father.  "at  night  you'd  find  a  high  spot,  and  you'd  doze  off,  but
then later you'd wake up because you'd be buried in all that slime. you'd
just  sink  in.  you'd  feel  it  ooze  up  over  your  body  and  sort  of  suck  you
down. and the whole time there was that constant rain. i mean, it never
stopped, not ever."

"sounds  pretty  wet,"  his  father  would've  said,  pausing  briefly.  "so

what happened?"

"you really want to hear this?"
"hey, i'm your father."
norman bowker smiled. he looked out across the lake and imagined
the  feel  of  his  tongue  against  the  truth.  "well,  this  one  time,  this  one
night out by the river ... i wasn't very brave."

"you have seven medals."
"sure."
"seven. count 'em. you weren't a coward either."
"well, maybe not. but i had the chance and i blew it. the stink, that's

what got to me. i couldn't take that goddamn awful smell."

"if you don't want to say any more—"
"i do want to."
"all right then. slow and sweet, take your time."
the road descended into the outskirts of town, turning northwest past
the  junior  college  and  the  tennis  courts,  then  past  chautauqua  park,
where  the  picnic  tables  were  spread  with  sheets  of  colored  plastic  and
where picnickers sat in lawn chairs and listened to the high school band
playing sousa marches under the band shell. the music faded after a few



blocks. he drove beneath a canopy of elms, then along a stretch of open
shore, then past the municipal docks, where a woman in pedal pushers
stood casting for bullheads. there were no other fish in the lake except
for perch and a few worthless carp. it was a bad lake for swimming and
fishing both.

he  drove  slowly.  no  hurry,  nowhere  to  go.  inside  the  chevy  the  air
was cool and oily-smelling, and he took pleasure in the steady sounds of
the engine and air-conditioning. a tour bus feeling, in a way, except the
town he was touring seemed dead. through the windows, as if in a stop-
motion photograph, the place looked as if it had been hit by nerve gas,
everything still and lifeless, even the people. the town could not talk, and
would not listen. "how'd you like to hear about the war?" he might have
asked,  but  the  place  could  only  blink  and  shrug.  it  had  no  memory,
therefore no guilt. the taxes got paid and the votes got counted and the
agencies of government did their work briskly and politely. it was a brisk,
polite town. it did not know shit about shit, and did not care to know.

norman bowker leaned back and considered what he might've said on
the subject. he knew shit. it was his specialty. the smell, in particular,
but also the numerous varieties of texture and taste. someday he'd give a
lecture  on  the  topic.  put  on  a  suit  and  tie  and  stand  up  in  front  of  the
kiwanis  club  and  tell  the  fuckers  about  all  the  wonderful  shit  he  knew.
pass out samples, maybe.

smiling at this, he clamped the steering wheel slightly right of center,
which  produced  a  smooth  clockwise  motion  against  the  curve  of  the
road. the chevy seemed to know its own way.

the sun was lower now. five fifty-five, he decided—six o'clock, tops.
along an unused railway spur, four workmen labored in the shadowy
red  heat,  setting  up  a  platform  and  steel  launchers  for  the  evening
fireworks. they were dressed alike in khaki trousers, work shirts, visored
caps, and brown boots. their faces were dark and smudgy. "want to hear
about  the  silver  star  i  almost  won?"  norman  bowker  whispered,  but
none  of  the  workmen  looked  up.  later  they  would  blow  color  into  the
sky.  the  lake  would  sparkle  with  reds  and  blues  and  greens,  like  a
mirror, and the picnickers would make low sounds of appreciation.

"well, see, it never stopped raining," he would've said. "the muck was

everywhere, you couldn't get away from it."

he would have paused a second.



then  he  would  have  told  about  the  night  they  bivouacked  in  a  field
along the song tra bong. a big swampy field beside the river. there was
a  ville  nearby,  fifty  meters  downstream,  and  right  away  a  dozen  old
mama-sans ran out and started yelling. a weird scene, he would've said.
the mama-sans just stood there in the rain, soaking wet, yapping away
about how this field was bad news. number ten, they said. evil ground.
not a good spot for good gis. finally lieutenant jimmy cross had to get
out his pistol and fire off a few rounds just to shoo them away. by then it
was  almost  dark.  so  they  set  up  a  perimeter,  ate  chow,  then  crawled
under their ponchos and tried to settle in for the night.

but the rain kept getting worse. and by midnight the field turned into

soup.

"just  this  deep,  oozy  soup,"  he  would've  said.  "like  sewage  or
something.  thick  and  mushy.  you  couldn't  sleep.  you  couldn't  even  lie
down,  not  for  long,  because  you'd  start  to  sink  under  the  soup.  real
clammy. you could feel the crud coming up inside your boots and pants."
here,  norman  bowker  would  have  squinted  against  the  low  sun.  he

would have kept his voice cool, no self-pity.

"but the worst part," he would've said quietly, "was the smell. partly it
was the river—a dead-fish smell—but it was something else, too. finally
somebody  figured  it  out.  what  this  was,  it  was  a  shit  field.  the  village
toilet. no indoor plumbing, right? so they used the field. i mean, we were
camped in a goddamn shit field."

he imagined sally kramer closing her eyes.
if  she  were  here  with  him,  in  the  car,  she  would've  said,  "stop  it.  i

don't like that word."

"that's what it was."
"all right, but you don't have to use that word."
"fine. what should we call it?"
she would have glared at him. "i don't know. just stop it."
clearly,  he  thought,  this  was  not  a  story  for  sally  kramer.  she  was
sally  gustafson  now.  no  doubt  max  would've  liked  it,  the  irony  in
particular, but max had become a pure idea, which was its own irony. it
was just too bad. if his father were here, riding shotgun around the lake,
the  old  man  might  have  glanced  over  for  a  second,  understanding
perfectly well that it was not a question of offensive language but of fact.
his father would have sighed and folded his arms and waited.



"a shit field," norman bowker would have said. "and later that night i

could've won the silver star for valor."

"right," his father would've murmured, "i hear you."
the  chevy  rolled  smoothly  across  a  viaduct  and  up  the  narrow  tar
road. to the right was open lake. to the left, across the road, most of the
lawns  were  scorched  dry  like  october  corn.  hopelessly,  round  and
round, a rotating sprinkler scattered lake water on dr. mason's vegetable
garden. already the prairie had been baked dry, but in august it would
get  worse.  the  lake  would  turn  green  with  algae,  and  the  golf  course
would  burn  up,  and  the  dragonflies  would  crack  open  for  want  of  good
water.

the  big  chevy  curved  past  centennial  beach  and  the  a&w  root  beer

stand.

it was his eighth revolution around the lake.
he followed the road past the handsome houses with their docks and
wooden  shingles.  back  to  slater  park,  across  the  causeway,  around  to
sunset park, as though riding on tracks.

the two little boys were still trudging along on their seven-mile hike.
out on the lake, the man in the stalled motorboat still fiddled with his
engine. the pair of mud hens floated like wooden decoys, and the water-
skiers looked tanned and athletic, and the high school band was packing
up  its  instruments,  and  the  woman  in  pedal  pushers  patiently  rebaited
her hook for one last try.

quaint, he thought.
a  hot  summer  day  and  it  was  all  very  quaint  and  remote.  the  four
workmen  had  nearly  completed  their  preparations  for  the  evening
fireworks.

facing  the  sun  again,  norman  bowker  decided  it  was  nearly  seven
o'clock. not much later the tired radio announcer confirmed it, his voice
rocking  itself  into  a  deep  sunday  snooze.  if  max  arnold  were  here,  he
would say something about the announcer's fatigue, and relate it to the
bright  pink  in  the  sky,  and  the  war,  and  courage.  a  pity  that  max  was
gone.  and  a  pity  about  his  father,  who  had  his  own  war  and  who  now
preferred silence.

still, there was so much to say.
how  the  rain  never  stopped.  how  the  cold  worked  into  your  bones.
sometimes  the  bravest  thing  on  earth  was  to  sit  through  the  night  and



feel the cold in your bones. courage was not always a matter of yes or no.
sometimes  it  came  in  degrees,  like  the  cold;  sometimes  you  were  very
brave up to a point and then beyond that point you were not so brave. in
certain  situations  you  could  do  incredible  things,  you  could  advance
toward enemy fire, but in other situations, which were not nearly so bad,
you  had  trouble  keeping  your  eyes  open.  sometimes,  like  that  night  in
the  shit  field,  the  difference  between  courage  and  cowardice  was
something small and stupid.

the way the earth bubbled. and the smell.
in a soft voice, without flourishes, he would have told the exact truth.
"late in the night," he would've said, "we took some mortar fire."
he  would've  explained  how  it  was  still  raining,  and  how  the  clouds
were  pasted  to  the  field,  and  how  the  mortar  rounds  seemed  to  come
right  out  of  the  clouds.  everything  was  black  and  wet.  the  field  just
exploded. rain and slop and shrapnel, nowhere to run, and all they could
do  was  worm  down  into  slime  and  cover  up  and  wait.  he  would've
described the crazy things he saw. weird things. like how at one point he
noticed a guy lying next to him in the sludge, completely buried except
for his face, and how after a moment the guy rolled his eyes and winked
at  him.  the  noise  was  fierce.  heavy  thunder,  and  mortar  rounds,  and
people yelling. some of the men began shooting up flares. red and green
and silver flares, all colors, and the rain came down in technicolor.

the field was boiling. the shells made deep slushy craters, opening up
all  those  years  of  waste,  centuries  worth,  and  the  smell  came  bubbling
out of the earth. two rounds hit close by. then a third, even closer, and
immediately,  off  to  his  left,  he  heard  somebody  screaming.  it  was
kiowa—he knew that. the sound was ragged and clotted up, but even so
he knew the voice. a strange gargling noise. rolling sideways, he crawled
toward the screaming in the dark. the rain was hard and steady. along
the  perimeter  there  were  quick  bursts  of  gunfire.  another  round  hit
nearby,  spraying  up  shit  and  water,  and  for  a  few  moments  he  ducked
down beneath the mud. he heard the valves in his heart. he heard the
quick, feathering action of the hinges.

extraordinary, he thought. as he came up, a pair of red flares puffed
open, a soft fuzzy glow, and in the glow he saw kiowa's wide-open eyes
settling down into the scum. briefly, all he could do was watch. he heard
himself moan. then he moved again, crabbing forward, but when he got



there kiowa was almost completely under. there was a knee. there was
an arm and a gold wristwatch and part of a boot.

he could not describe what happened next, not ever, but he would've
tried  anyway.  he  would've  spoken  carefully  so  as  to  make  it  real  for
anyone who would listen.

there were bubbles where kiowa's head should've been.
the  left  hand  was  curled  open;  the  fingernails  were  filthy;  the
wristwatch  gave  off  a  green  phosphorescent  shine  as  it  slipped  beneath
the thick waters.

he would've talked about this, and how he grabbed kiowa by the boot
and tried to pull him out. he pulled hard but kiowa was gone, and then
suddenly he felt himself going, too. he could taste it. the shit was in his
nose and eyes. there were flares and mortar rounds, and the stink was
everywhere—it  was  inside  him,  in  his  lungs—and  he  could  no  longer
tolerate it. not here, he thought. not like this. he released kiowa's boot
and  watched  it  slide  away.  slowly,  working  his  way  up,  he  hoisted
himself out of the deep mud, and then he lay still and tasted the shit in
his mouth and closed his eyes and listened to the rain and explosions and
bubbling sounds.
he was alone.
he had lost his weapon but it did not matter. all he wanted was a bath.
nothing else. a hot soapy bath.
circling the lake, norman bowker remembered how his friend kiowa

had disappeared under the waste and water.

"i  didn't  flip  out,"  he  would've  said.  "i  was  cool.  if  things  had  gone

right, if it hadn't been for that smell, i could've won the silver star."

a good war story, he thought, but it was not a war for war stories, nor
for talk of valor, and nobody in town wanted to know about the terrible
stink.  they  wanted  good  intentions  and  good  deeds.  but  the  town  was
not to blame, really. it was a nice little town, very prosperous, with neat
houses and all the sanitary conveniences.

norman  bowker  lit  a  cigarette  and  cranked  open  his  window.  seven

thirty-five, he decided.

the lake had divided into two halves. one half still glistened, the other
was caught in shadow. along the causeway, the two little boys marched
on.  the  man  in  the  stalled  motorboat  yanked  frantically  on  the  cord  to
his  engine,  and  the  two  mud  hens  sought  supper  at  the  bottom  of  the



lake, tails bobbing. he passed sunset park once again, and more houses,
and the junior college and the tennis courts, and the picnickers, who now
sat  waiting  for  the  evening  fireworks.  the  high  school  band  was  gone.
the woman in pedal pushers patiently toyed with her line.

although  it  was  not  yet  dusk,  the  a&w  was  already  awash  in  neon

lights.

he maneuvered his father's chevy into one of the parking slots, let the
engine idle, and sat back. the place was doing a good holiday business.
mostly  kids,  it  seemed,  and  a  few  farmers  in  for  the  day.  he  did  not
recognize  any  of  the  faces.  a  slim,  hipless  young  carhop  passed  by,  but
when he hit the horn, she did not seem to notice. her eyes slid sideways.
she hooked a tray to the window of a firebird, laughing lightly, leaning
forward to chat with the three boys inside.

he felt invisible in the soft twilight. straight ahead, over the take-out
counter,  swarms  of  mosquitoes  electrocuted  themselves  against  an
aluminum pest-rid machine.

it was a calm, quiet summer evening.
he  honked  again,  this  time  leaning  on  the  horn.  the  young  carhop
turned  slowly,  as  if  puzzled,  then  said  something  to  the  boys  in  the
firebird  and  moved  reluctantly  toward  him.  pinned  to  her  shirt  was  a
badge that said eat mama burgers.

when  she  reached  his  window,  she  stood  straight  up  so  that  all  he

could see was the badge.

"mama burger," he said. "maybe some fries, too."
the  girl  sighed,  leaned  down,  and  shook  her  head.  her  eyes  were  as

fluffy and airy-light as cotton candy.

"you blind?" she said.
she put out her hand and tapped an intercom attached to a steel post.
"punch  the  button  and  place  your  order.  all  i  do  is  carry  the  dumb

trays."

she  stared  at  him  for  a  moment.  briefly,  he  thought,  a  question
lingered in her fuzzy eyes, but then she turned and punched the button
for him and returned to her friends in the firebird.

the intercom squeaked and said, "order."
"mama burger and fries," norman bowker said.
"affirmative, copy clear. no rootie-tootie?"



"rootie-tootie?"
"you know, man—root beer.
"a small one."
"roger-dodger. repeat: one mama, one fries, one small beer. fire for

effect. stand by."

the intercom squeaked and went dead.
"out," said norman bowker.
when the girl brought his tray, he ate quickly, without looking up. the
tired radio announcer in des moines gave the time, almost eight-thirty.
dark was pressing in tight now, and he wished there were somewhere to
go.  in  the  morning  he'd  check  out  some  job  possibilities.  shoot  a  few
buckets down at the y, maybe wash the chevy.

he finished his root beer and pushed the intercom button.
"order," said the tinny voice.
"all done."
"that's it?"
"i guess so."
"hey, loosen up," the voice said. "what you really need, friend?"
norman bowker smiled.
"well," he said, "how'd you like to hear about—"
he stopped and shook his head.
"hear what, man?"
"nothing."
"well, hey," the intercom said, "i'm sure as fuck not going anywhere.

screwed to a post, for god sake. go ahead, try me."

"nothing."
"you sure?"
"positive. all done."
the  intercom  made  a  light  sound  of  disappointment.  "your  choice,  i

guess. over an' out."

"out," said norman bowker.
on  his  tenth  turn  around  the  lake  he  passed  the  hiking  boys  for  the
last time. the man in the stalled motorboat was gone; the mud hens were
gone.  beyond  the  lake,  over  sally  gustafson's  house,  the  sun  had  left  a



smudge of purple on the horizon. the band shell was deserted, and the
woman  in  pedal  pushers  quietly  reeled  in  her  line,  and  dr.  mason's
sprinkler went round and round.

on  his  eleventh  revolution  he  switched  off  the  air-conditioning,
opened  up  his  window,  and  rested  his  elbow  comfortably  on  the  sill,
driving with one hand.

there was nothing to say.
he could not talk about it and never would. the evening was smooth

and warm.

if it had been possible, which it wasn't, he would have explained how
his friend kiowa slipped away that night beneath the dark swampy field.
he was folded in with the war; he was part of the waste.

turning  on  his  headlights,  driving  slowly,  norman  bowker
remembered how he had taken hold of kiowa's boot and pulled hard, but
how the smell was simply too much, and how he'd backed off and in that
way had lost the silver star.

he wished he could've explained some of this. how he had been braver
than he ever thought possible, but how he had not been so brave as he
wanted to be. the distinction was important. max arnold, who loved fine
lines,  would've  appreciated  it.  and  his  father,  who  already  knew,
would've nodded.

"the truth," norman bowker would've said, "is i let the guy go."
"maybe he was already gone."
"he wasn't."
"but maybe."
"no, i could feel it. he wasn't. some things you can feel."
his father would have been quiet for a while, watching the headlights

against the narrow tar road.

"well,  anyway,"  the  old  man  would've  said,  "there's  still  the  seven

medals."

"i suppose."
"seven honeys."
"right."
on his twelfth revolution, the sky went crazy with color.
he  pulled  into  sunset  park  and  stopped  in  the  shadow  of  a  picnic
shelter.  after  a  time  he  got  out,  walked  down  to  the  beach,  and  waded



into  the  lake  without  undressing.  the  water  felt  warm  against  his  skin.
he  put  his  head  under.  he  opened  his  lips,  very  slightly,  for  the  taste,
then he stood up and folded his arms and watched the fireworks. for a
small town, he decided, it was a pretty good show.

notes


"speaking  of  courage"  was  written  in  1975  at  the  suggestion  of
norman  bowker,  who  three  years  later  hanged  himself  in  the  locker
room of a ymca in his hometown in central iowa.

in  the  spring  of  1975,  near  the  time  of  saigon's  final  collapse,  i
received a long, disjointed letter in which bowker described the problem
of  finding  a  meaningful  use  for  his  life  after  the  war.  he  had  worked
briefly as an automotive parts salesman, a janitor, a car wash attendant,
and  a  short-order  cook  at  the  local  a&w  fast-food  franchise.  none  of
these  jobs,  he  said,  had  lasted  more  than  ten  weeks.  he  lived  with  his
parents,  who  supported  him,  and  who  treated  him  with  kindness  and
obvious  love.  at  one  point  he  had  enrolled  in  the  junior  college  in  his
hometown,  but  the  course  work,  he  said,  seemed  too  abstract,  too
distant, with nothing real or tangible at stake, certainly not the stakes of
a war. he dropped out after eight months. he spent his mornings in bed.
in the afternoons he played pickup basketball at the y, and then at night
he drove around town in his father's car, mostly alone, or with a six-pack
of beer, cruising.

"the thing is," he wrote, "there's no place to go. not just in this lousy
little town. in general. my life, i mean. it's almost like i got killed over in
nam . . . hard to describe. that night when kiowa got wasted, i sort of
sank down into the sewage with him . . . feels like i'm still in deep shit."

the letter covered seventeen handwritten pages, its tone jumping from
self-pity  to  anger  to  irony  to  guilt  to  a  kind  of  feigned  indifference.  he
didn't  know  what  to  feel.  in  the  middle  of  the  letter,  for  example,  he
reproached himself for complaining too much:

god,  this  is  starting  to  sound  like  some  jerkoff  vet  crying  in  his  beer.
sorry  about  that.  i'm  no  basket  case—not  even  any  bad  dreams.  and  i
don't  feel  like  anybody  mistreats  me  or  anything,  except  sometimes



people  act  too  nice,  too  polite,  like  they're  afraid  they  might  ask  the
wrong question . . . but i shouldn't bitch. one thing i hate—really hate—
is  all  those  whiner-vets.  guys  sniveling  about  how  they  didn't  get  any
parades.  such  absolute  crap.  i  mean,  who  in  his  right  mind  wants  a
parade?  or  getting  his  back  clapped  by  a  bunch  of  patriotic  idiots  who
don't  know  jack  about  what  it  feels  like  to  kill  people  or  get  shot  at  or
sleep  in  the  rain  or  watch  your  buddy  go  down  underneath  the  mud?
who needs it?
anyhow, i'm basically a-okay. home free!! so why not come down for a
visit sometime and we'll chase pussy and shoot the breeze and tell each
other old war lies? a good long bull session, you know?


i  felt  it  coming,  and  near  the  end  of  the  letter  it  came.  he  explained
that he had read my first book, if i die in a combat zone, which he liked
except for the "bleeding-heart political parts." for half a page he talked
about  how  much  the  book  had  meant  to  him,  how  it  brought  back  all
kinds  of  memories,  the  villes  and  paddies  and  rivers,  and  how  he
recognized most of the characters, including himself, even though almost
all of the names were changed. then bowker came straight out with it:

what you should do, tim, is write a story about a guy who feels like he
got zapped over in that shithole. a guy who can't get his act together and
just drives around town all day and can't think of any damn place to go
and doesn't know how to get there anyway. this guy wants to talk about
it, but he can't. . . if you want, you can use the stuff in this letter. (but not
my  real  name,  okay?)  i'd  write  it  myself  except  i  can't  ever  find  any
words,  if  you  know  what  i  mean,  and  i  can't  figure  out  what  exactly  to
say.  something  about  the  field  that  night.  the  way  kiowa  just
disappeared into the crud. you were there—you can tell it.


norman  bowker's  letter  hit  me  hard.  for  years  i'd  felt  a  certain
smugness  about  how  easily  i  had  made  the  shift  from  war  to  peace.  a
nice smooth glide—no flashbacks or midnight sweats. the war was over,
after  all.  and  the  thing  to  do  was  go  on.  so  i  took  pride  in  sliding
gracefully  from  vietnam  to  graduate  school,  from  chu  lai  to  harvard,
from one world to another. in ordinary conversation i never spoke much
about the war, certainly not in detail, and yet ever since my return i had
been  talking  about  it  virtually  nonstop  through  my  writing.  telling



stories  seemed  a  natural,  inevitable  process,  like  clearing  the  throat.
partly catharsis, partly communication, it was a way of grabbing people
by  the  shirt  and  explaining  exactly  what  had  happened  to  me,  how  i'd
allowed  myself  to  get  dragged  into  a  wrong  war,  all  the  mistakes  i'd
made, all the terrible things i had seen and done.

i  did  not  look  on  my  work  as  therapy,  and  still  don't.  yet  when  i
received norman bowker's letter, it occurred to me that the act of writing
had led me through a swirl of memories that might otherwise have ended
in  paralysis  or  worse.  by  telling  stories,  you  objectify  your  own
experience. you separate it from yourself. you pin down certain truths.
you  make  up  others.  you  start  sometimes  with  an  incident  that  truly
happened,  like  the  night  in  the  shit  field,  and  you  carry  it  forward  by
inventing incidents that did not in fact occur but that nonetheless help to
clarify and explain.

in any case, norman bowker's letter had an effect. it haunted me for
more  than  a  month,  not  the  words  so  much  as  its  desperation,  and  i
resolved finally to take him up on his story suggestion. at the time i was
at  work  on  a  new  novel,  going  after  cacciato,  and  one  morning  i  sat
down and began a chapter titled "speaking of courage." the emotional
core  came  directly  from  bowker's  letter:  the  simple  need  to  talk.  to
provide a dramatic frame, i collapsed events into a single time and place,
a car circling a lake on a quiet afternoon in midsummer, using the lake as
a  nucleus  around  which  the  story  would  orbit.  as  he'd  requested,  i  did
not  use  norman  bowker's  name,  instead  substituting  the  name  of  my
novel's main character, paul berlin. for the scenery i borrowed heavily
from  my  own  hometown.  wholesale  thievery,  in  fact.  i  lifted  up
worthington,  minnesota—the  lake,  the  road,  the  causeway,  the  woman
in pedal pushers, the junior college, the handsome houses and docks and
boats and public parks—and carried it all a few hundred miles south and
transplanted it onto the iowa prairie.

the  writing  went  quickly  and  easily.  i  drafted  the  piece  in  a  week  or
two,  fiddled  with  it  for  another  week,  then  published  it  as  a  separate
short story.

almost immediately, though, there was a sense of failure. the details
of norman bowker's story were missing. in this original version, which i
still conceived as part of the novel, i had been forced to omit the shit field
and the rain and the death of kiowa, replacing this material with events
that better fit the book's narrative. as a consequence i'd lost the natural



counterpoint  between  the  lake  and  the  field.  a  metaphoric  unity  was
broken. what the piece needed, and did not have, was the terrible killing
power of that shit field.

as  the  novel  developed  over  the  next  year,  and  as  my  own  ideas
clarified, it became apparent that the chapter had no proper home in the
larger  narrative.  going  after  cacciato  was  a  war  story;  "speaking  of
courage" was a postwar story. two different time periods, two different
sets  of  issues.  there  was  no  choice  but  to  remove  the  chapter  entirely.
the mistake, in part, had been in trying to wedge the piece into a novel.
beyond  that,  though,  something  about  the  story  had  frightened  me—i
was  afraid  to  speak  directly,  afraid  to  remember—and  in  the  end  the
piece  had been ruined by a failure to tell the full and exact truth about
our night in the shit field.

over the next several months, as it often happens, i managed to erase
the story's flaws from my memory, taking pride in a shadowy, idealized
recollection  of  its  virtues.  when  the  piece  appeared  in  an  anthology  of
short fiction, i sent a copy off to norman bowker with the thought that it
might please him. his reaction was short and somewhat bitter.

"it's  not  terrible,"  he  wrote  me,  "but  you  left  out  vietnam.  where's

kiowa? where's the shit?"

eight months later he hanged himself.
in august of 1978 his mother sent me a brief note explaining what had
happened. he'd been playing pickup basketball at the y; after two hours
he went off for a drink of water; he used a jump rope; his friends found
him hanging from a water pipe. there was no suicide note, no message of
any  kind.  "norman  was  a  quiet  boy,"  his  mother  wrote,  "and  i  don't
suppose he wanted to bother anybody."


now, a decade after his death, i'm hoping that "speaking of courage"
makes good on norman bowker's silence. and i hope it's a better story.
although  the  old  structure  remains,  the  piece  has  been  substantially
revised, in some places by severe cutting, in other places by the addition
of  new  material.  norman  is  back  in  the  story,  where  he  belongs,  and  i
don't  think  he  would  mind  that  his  real  name  appears.  the  central
incident—our long night in the shit field along the song tra bong—has
been restored to the piece. it was hard stuff to write. kiowa, after all, had
been a close friend, and for years i've avoided thinking about his death
and my own complicity in it. even here it's not easy. in the interests of



truth,  however,  i  want  to  make  it  clear  that  norman  bowker  was  in  no
way  responsible  for  what  happened  to  kiowa.  norman  did  not
experience a failure of nerve that night. he did not freeze up or lose the
silver star for valor. that part of the story is my own.


in the field


at daybreak the platoon of eighteen soldiers formed into a loose rank
and began wading side by side through the deep muck of the shit field.
they moved slowly in the rain. leaning forward, heads down, they used
the butts of their weapons as probes, wading across the field to the river
and then turning and wading back again. they were tired and miserable;
all they wanted now was to get it finished. kiowa was gone. he was under
the mud and water, folded in with the war, and their only thought was to
find him and dig him out and then move on to someplace dry and warm.
it  had  been  a  hard  night.  maybe  the  worst  ever.  the  rains  had  fallen
without stop, and the song tra bong had overflowed its banks, and the
muck had now risen thigh-deep in the field along the river. a low, gray
mist hovered over the land. off to the west there was thunder, soft little
moaning  sounds,  and  the  monsoons  seemed  to  be  a  lasting  element  of
the war. the eighteen soldiers moved in silence. first lieutenant jimmy
cross went first, now and then straightening out the rank, closing up the
gaps.  his  uniform  was  dark  with  mud;  his  arms  and  face  were  filthy.
early in the morning he had radioed in the mia report, giving the name
and  circumstances,  but  he  was  now  determined  to  find  his  man,  no
matter what, even if it meant flying in slabs of concrete and damming up
the river and draining the entire field. he would not lose a member of his
command like this. it wasn't right. kiowa had been a fine soldier and a
fine  human  being,  a  devout  baptist,  and  there  was  no  way  lieutenant
cross would allow such a good man to be lost under the slime of a shit
field.

briefly,  he  stopped  and  watched  the  clouds.  except  for  some
occasional thunder it was a deeply quiet morning, just the rain and the
steady sloshing sounds of eighteen men wading through the thick waters.
lieutenant  cross  wished  the  rain  would  let  up.  even  for  an  hour,  it
would make things easier.



but then he shrugged. the rain was the war and you had to fight it.
turning, he looked out across the field and yelled at one of his men to
close up the rank. not a man, really—a boy. the young soldier stood off
by himself at the center of the field in knee-deep water, reaching down
with both hands as if chasing some object just beneath the surface. the
boy's  shoulders  were  shaking.  jimmy  cross  yelled  again  but  the  young
soldier did not turn or look up. in his hooded poncho, everything caked
with mud, the boy's face was impossible to make out. the filth seemed to
erase  identities,  transforming  the  men  into  identical  copies  of  a  single
soldier,  which  was  exactly  how  jimmy  cross  had  been  trained  to  treat
them, as interchangeable units of command. it was difficult sometimes,
but he tried to avoid that sort of thinking. he had no military ambitions.
he  preferred  to  view  his  men  not  as  units  but  as  human  beings.  and
kiowa  had  been  a  splendid  human  being,  the  very  best,  intelligent  and
gentle  and  quiet-spoken.  very  brave,  too.  and  decent.  the  kid's  father
taught sunday school in oklahoma city, where kiowa had been raised to
believe  in  the  promise  of  salvation  under  jesus  christ,  and  this
conviction  had  always  been  present  in  the  boy's  smile,  in  his  posture
toward  the  world,  in  the  way  he  never  went  anywhere  without  an
illustrated  new  testament  that  his  father  had  mailed  to  him  as  a
birthday present back in january.
a crime, jimmy cross thought.
looking  out  toward  the  river,  he  knew  for  a  fact  that  he  had  made  a
mistake setting up here. the order had come from higher, true, but still
he  should've  exercised  some  field  discretion.  he  should've  moved  to
higher ground for the night, should've radioed in false coordinates. there
was  nothing  he  could  do  now,  but  still  it  was  a  mistake  and  a  hideous
waste. he felt sick about it. standing in the deep waters of the field, first
lieutenant jimmy cross began composing a letter in his head to the kid's
father,  not  mentioning  the  shit  field,  just  saying  what  a  fine  soldier
kiowa had been, what a fine human being, and how he was the kind of
son that any father could be proud of forever.


the  search  went  slowly.  for  a  time  the  morning  seemed  to  brighten,
the  sky  going  to  a  lighter  shade  of  silver,  but  then  the  rains  came  back
hard and steady. there was the feel of permanent twilight.

at  the  far  left  of  the  line,  azar  and  norman  bowker  and  mitchell
sanders waded along the edge of the field closest to the river. they were



tall  men,  but  at  times  the  muck  came  to  midthigh,  other  times  to  the
crotch.

azar kept shaking his head. he coughed and shook his head and said,
"man,  talk  about  irony.  i  bet  if  kiowa  was  here,  i  bet  he'd  just  laugh.
eating shit—it's your classic irony."

"fine," said norman bowker. "now pipe down."
azar  sighed.  "wasted  in  the  waste,"  he  said.  "a  shit  field.  you  got  to

admit, it's pure world-class irony."

the  three  men  moved  with  slow,  heavy  steps.  it  was  hard  to  keep
balance.  their  boots  sank  into  the  ooze,  which  produced  a  powerful
downward suction, and with each step they would have to pull up hard to
break the hold. the rain made quick dents in the water, like tiny mouths,
and the stink was everywhere.

when  they  reached  the  river,  they  shifted  a  few  meters  to  the  north
and  began  wading  back  up  the  field.  occasionally  they  used  their
weapons to test the bottom, but mostly they just searched with their feet.
"a classic case," azar was saying. "biting the dirt, so to speak, that tells

the story."

"enough," bowker said.
"like those old cowboy movies. one more redskin bites the dirt."
"i'm serious, man. zip it shut."
azar smiled and said, "classic."
the  morning  was  cold  and  wet.  they  had  not  slept  during  the  night,
not  even  for  a  few  moments,  and  all  three  of  them  were  feeling  the
tension  as  they  moved  across  the  field  toward  the  river.  there  was
nothing they could do for kiowa. just find him  and slide him aboard a
chopper. whenever a man died it was always the same, a desire to get it
over with quickly, no fuss or ceremony, and what they wanted now was
to  head  for  a  ville  and  get  under  a  roof  and  forget  what  had  happened
during the night.

halfway  across  the  field  mitchell  sanders  stopped.  he  stood  for  a
moment with his eyes shut, feeling along the bottom with a foot, then he
passed  his  weapon  over  to  norman  bowker  and  reached  down  into  the
muck. after a second he hauled up a filthy green rucksack.



the three men did not speak for a time. the pack was heavy with mud
and  water,  dead-looking.  inside  were  a  pair  of  moccasins  and  an
illustrated new testament.

"well,"  mitchell  sanders  finally  said,  "the  guy's  around  here

somewhere."

"better tell the lt."
"screw him."
"yeah, but—"
"some  lieutenant,"  sanders  said.  "camps  us  in  a  toilet.  man  don't

know shit."

"nobody knew," bowker said.
"maybe so, maybe not. ten billion places we could've set up last night,

the man picks a latrine."

norman  bowker  stared  down  at  the  rucksack.  it  was  made  of  dark
green nylon with an aluminum frame, but now it had the curious look of
flesh.

"it wasn't the lt's fault," bowker said quietly.
"whose then?"
"nobody's. nobody knew till afterward."
mitchell  sanders  made  a  sound  in  his  throat.  he  hoisted  up  the
rucksack, slipped into the harness, and pulled the straps tight. "all right,
but this much for sure. the man knew it was raining. he knew about the
river. one plus one. add it up, you get exactly what happened." sanders
glared  at  the  river.  "move  it,"  he  said.  "kiowa's  waiting  on  us."  slowly
then,  bending  against  the  rain,  azar  and  norman  bowker  and  mitchell
sanders began wading again through the deep waters, their eyes down,
circling out from where they had found the rucksack.


first lieutenant jimmy cross stood fifty meters away. he had finished
writing  the  letter  in  his  head,  explaining  things  to  kiowa's  father,  and
now he folded his arms and watched his platoon crisscrossing the wide
field. in a funny way, it reminded him of the municipal golf course in his
hometown in new jersey. a lost ball, he thought. tired players searching
through the rough, sweeping back and forth in long systematic patterns.
he wished he were there right now. on the sixth hole. looking out across
the  water  hazard  that  fronted  the  small  flat  green,  a  seven  iron  in  his



hand,  calculating  wind  and  distance,  wondering  if  he  should  reach
instead for an eight. a tough decision, but all you could ever lose was a
ball. you did not lose a player. and you never had to wade out into the
hazard and spend the day searching through the slime.

jimmy cross did not want the responsibility of leading these men. he
had never wanted it. in his sophomore year at mount sebastian college
he  had  signed  up  for  the  reserve  officer  training  corps  without  much
thought. an automatic thing: because his friends had joined, and because
it was worth a few credits, and because it seemed preferable to letting the
draft take him. he was unprepared. twenty-four years old and his heart
wasn't in it. military matters meant nothing to him. he did not care one
way or the other about the war, and he had no desire to command, and
even after all these months in the bush, all the days and nights, even then
he did not know enough to keep his men out of a shit field.

what he should've done, he told himself, was follow his first impulse.
in the late afternoon yesterday, when they reached the night coordinates,
he should've taken one look and headed for higher ground. he should've
known. no excuses. at one edge of the field was a small ville, and right
away  a  couple  of  old  mama-sans  had  trotted  out  to  warn  him.  number
ten, they'd said. evil ground. not a good spot for good gis. but it was a
war,  and  he  had  his  orders,  so  they'd  set  up  a  perimeter  and  crawled
under  their  ponchos  and  tried  to  settle  in  for  the  night.  the  rain  never
stopped. by midnight the song tra bong had overflowed its banks. the
field turned to slop, everything soft and mushy. he remembered how the
water  kept  rising,  how  a  terrible  stink  began  to  bubble  up  out  of  the
earth. it was a dead-fish smell, partly, but something else, too, and then
later  in  the  night  mitchell  sanders  had  crawled  through  the  rain  and
grabbed him hard by the arm and asked what he was doing setting up in
a shit field. the village toilet, sanders said. he remembered the look on
sanders's face. the guy stared for a moment and then wiped his mouth
and whispered, "shit," and then crawled away into the dark.

a stupid mistake. that's all it was, a mistake, but it had killed kiowa.
lieutenant  jimmy  cross  felt  something  tighten  inside  him.  in  the
letter to kiowa's father he would apologize point-blank. just admit to the
blunders.

he  would  place  the  blame  where  it  belonged.  tactically,  he'd  say,  it
was indefensible ground from the start. low and flat. no natural cover.
and so late in the night, when they took mortar fire from across the river,



all they could do was snake down under the slop and lie there and wait.
the field just exploded. rain and slop and shrapnel, it all mixed together,
and  the  field  seemed  to  boil.  he  would  explain  this  to  kiowa's  father.
carefully,  not  covering  up  his  own  guilt,  he  would  tell  how  the  mortar
rounds made craters in the slush, spraying up great showers of filth, and
how the craters then collapsed on themselves and filled up with mud and
water,  sucking
things,  weapons  and
entrenching tools and belts of ammunition, and how in this way his son
kiowa had been combined with the waste and the war.

things  down,  swallowing

my own fault, he would say.
straightening  up,  first  lieutenant  jimmy  cross  rubbed  his  eyes  and

tried to get his thoughts together. the rain fell in a cold, sad drizzle.

off toward the river he again noticed the young soldier standing alone
at the center of the field. the boy's shoulders were shaking. maybe it was
something  in  the  posture  of  the  soldier,  or  the  way  he  seemed  to  be
reaching  for  some  invisible  object  beneath  the  surface,  but  for  several
moments  jimmy  cross  stood  very  still,  afraid  to  move,  yet  knowing  he
had to, and then he murmured to himself, "my fault," and he nodded and
waded out across the field toward the boy.


the young soldier was trying hard not to cry.
he, too, blamed himself. bent forward at the waist, groping with both
hands,  he  seemed  to  be  chasing  some  creature  just  beyond  reach,
something  elusive,  a  fish  or  a  frog.  his  lips  were  moving.  like  jimmy
cross,  the  boy  was  explaining  things  to  an  absent  judge.  it  wasn't  to
defend himself. the boy recognized his own guilt and wanted only to lay
out the full causes.

wading sideways a few steps, he leaned down and felt along the soft

bottom of the field.

he pictured kiowa's face. they'd been close buddies, the tightest, and
he  remembered  how  last  night  they  had  huddled  together  under  their
ponchos,  the  rain  cold  and  steady,  the  water  rising  to  their  knees,  but
how  kiowa  had  just  laughed  it  off  and  said  they  should  concentrate  on
better things. and so for a long while they'd talked about their families
and hometowns. at one point, the boy remembered, he'd been showing
kiowa  a  picture  of  his  girlfriend.  he  remembered  switching  on  his
flashlight. a stupid thing to do, but he did it anyway, and he remembered



kiowa leaning in for a look at the picture—"hey, she's cute," he'd said—
and then the field exploded all around them.

like  murder,  the  boy  thought.  the  flashlight  made  it  happen.  dumb

and dangerous. and as a result his friend kiowa was dead.

that simple, he thought.
he wished there were some other way to look at it, but there wasn't.
very  simple  and  very  final.  he  remembered  two  mortar  rounds  hitting
close  by.  then  a  third,  even  closer,  and  off  to  his  left  he'd  heard
somebody  scream.  the  voice  was  ragged  and  clotted  up,  but  he  knew
instantly that it was kiowa.

he  remembered  trying  to  crawl  toward  the  screaming.  no  sense  of
direction,  though,  and  the  field  seemed  to  suck  him  under,  and
everything  was  black  and  wet  and  swirling,  and  he  couldn't  get  his
bearings, and then another round hit nearby, and for a few moments all
he could do was hold his breath and duck down beneath the water.

later, when he came up again, there were no more screams. there was
an arm and a wristwatch and part of a boot. there were bubbles where
kiowa's head should've been.

he remembered grabbing the boot. he remembered pulling hard, but
how the field seemed to pull back, like a tug-of-war he couldn't win, and
how finally he had to whisper his friend's name and let go and watch the
boot  slide  away.  then  for  a  long  time  there  were  things  he  could  not
remember.  various  sounds,  various  smells.  later  he'd  found  himself
lying on a little rise, face-up, tasting the field in his mouth, listening to
the  rain  and  explosions  and  bubbling  sounds.  he  was  alone.  he'd  lost
everything.  he'd  lost  kiowa  and  his  weapon  and  his  flashlight  and  his
girlfriend's  picture.  he  remembered  this.  he  remembered  wondering  if
he could lose himself.

now,  in  the  dull  morning  rain,  the  boy  seemed  frantic.  he  waded
quickly from spot to spot, leaning down and plunging his hands into the
water. he did not look up when lieutenant jimmy cross approached.

"right here," the boy was saying. "got to be right here."
jimmy  cross  remembered  the  kid's  face  but  not  the  name.  that
happened  sometimes.  he  tried  to  treat  his  men  as  individuals  but
sometimes the names just escaped him.

he watched the young soldier shove his hands into the water. "right

here," he kept saying. his movements seemed random and jerky.



jimmy cross waited a moment, then stepped closer. "listen," he said

quietly, "the guy could be anywhere."
the boy glanced up. "who could?"
"kiowa. you can't expect—"
"kiowa's dead."
"well, yes."
the young soldier nodded. "so what about billie?"
"who?"
"my girl. what about her? this picture, it was the only one i had. right

here, i lost it."

jimmy cross shook his head. it bothered him that he could not come

up with a name.

"slow down," he said, "i don't—"
"billie's picture. i had it all wrapped up, i had it in plastic, so it'll be
okay if i can . . . last night we were looking at it, me and kiowa. right
here. i know for sure it's right here somewhere."

jimmy  cross  smiled  at  the  boy.  "you  can  ask  her  for  another  one.  a

better one."

"she  won't  send  another  one.  she's  not  even  my  girl  anymore,  she

won't. . . man, i got to find it."

the boy yanked his arm free.
he  shuffled  sideways  and  stooped  down  again  and  dipped  into  the
muck  with  both  hands.  his  shoulders  were  shaking.  briefly,  lieutenant
cross  wondered  where  the  kid's  weapon  was,  and  his  helmet,  but  it
seemed better not to ask.

he  felt  some  pity  come  on  him.  for  a  moment  the  day  seemed  to
soften. so much hurt, he thought. he watched the young soldier wading
through  the  water,  bending  down  and  then  standing  and  then  bending
down again, as if something might finally be salvaged from all the waste.

jimmy cross silently wished the boy luck.
then  he  closed  his  eyes  and  went  back  to  working  on  the  letter  to

kiowa's father.




across the field azar and norman bowker and mitchell sanders were
wading alongside a narrow dike at the edge of the field. it was near noon
now.

norman  bowker  found  kiowa.  he  was  under  two  feet  of  water.

nothing showed except the heel of a boot.

"that's him?" azar said.
"who else?"
"i don't know." azar shook his head. "i don't know."
norman  bowker  touched  the  boot,  covered  his  eyes  for  a  moment,

then stood up and looked at azar.
"so where's the joke?" he said.
"no joke."
"eating shit. let's hear that one."
"forget it."
mitchell sanders told them to knock it off. the three soldiers moved to
the dike, put down their packs and weapons, then waded back to where
the boot was showing. the body lay partly wedged under a layer of mud
beneath the water. it was hard to get traction; with each movement the
muck  would  grip  their  feet  and  hold  tight.  the  rain  had  come  back
harder  now.  mitchell  sanders  reached  down  and  found  kiowa's  other
boot, and they waited a moment, then sanders sighed and said, "okay,"
and they took hold of the two boots and pulled up hard. there was only a
slight give. they tried again, but this time the body did not move at all.
after the third try they stopped and looked down for a while. "one more
time," norman bowker said. he counted to three and they leaned back
and pulled.

"stuck," said mitchell sanders.
"i see that. christ."
they tried again, then called over henry dobbins and rat kiley, and
all  five  of  them  put  their  arms  and  backs  into  it,  but  the  body  was
jammed in tight.

azar moved to the dike and sat holding his stomach. his face was pale.
the  others  stood  in  a  circle,  watching  the  water,  then  after  a  time
somebody said, "we can't just leave him there," and the men nodded and
got  out  their  entrenching  tools  and  began  digging.  it  was  hard,  sloppy



work. the mud seemed to flow back faster than they could dig, but kiowa
was their friend and they kept at it anyway.

slowly,  in  little  groups,  the  rest  of  the  platoon  drifted  over  to  watch.
only lieutenant jimmy cross and the young soldier were still searching
the field.

"what we should do, i guess," norman bowker said, "is tell the lt."
mitchell  sanders  shook  his  head.  "just  mess  things  up.  besides,  the

man looks happy out there, real content. let him be."

after  ten  minutes  they  uncovered  most  of  kiowa's  lower  body.  the
corpse was angled steeply into the muck, upside down, like a diver who
had plunged headfirst off a high tower. the men stood quietly for a few
seconds. there was a feeling of awe. mitchell sanders finally nodded and
said,  "let's  get  it  done,"  and  they  took  hold  of  the  legs  and  pulled  up
hard, then pulled again, and after a moment kiowa came sliding to the
surface. a piece of his shoulder was missing; the arms and chest and face
were  cut  up  with  shrapnel.  he  was  covered  with  bluish  green  mud.
"well," henry dobbins said, "it could be worse," and dave jensen said,
"how, man? tell me how." carefully, trying not to look at the body, they
carried kiowa over to the dike and laid him down. they used towels to
clean off the scum. rat kiley went through the kid's pockets, placed his
personal effects in a plastic bag, taped the bag to kiowa's wrist, then used
the radio to call in a dustoff.

moving  away,  the  men  found  things  to  do  with  themselves,  some
smoking, some opening up cans of c rations, a few just standing in the
rain.

for all of them it was a relief to have it finished. there was the promise
now  of  finding  a  hootch  somewhere,  or  an  abandoned  pagoda,  where
they could strip down and wring out their fatigues and maybe start a hot
fire.  they  felt  bad  for  kiowa.  but  they  also  felt  a  kind  of  giddiness,  a
secret  joy,  because  they  were  alive,  and  because  even  the  rain  was
preferable  to  being  sucked  under  a  shit  field,  and  because  it  was  all  a
matter of luck and happenstance.

azar sat down on the dike next to norman bowker.
"listen," he said. "those dumb jokes—i didn't mean anything."
"we all say things."
"yeah, but when i saw the guy, it made me feel—i don't know—like he

was listening."



"he wasn't."
"i guess not. but i felt sort of guilty almost, like if i'd kept my mouth

shut none of it would've ever happened. like it was my fault."

norman bowker looked out across the wet field.
"nobody's fault," he said. "everybody's."



near the center of the field first lieutenant jimmy cross squatted in
the  muck,  almost  entirely  submerged.  in  his  head  he  was  revising  the
letter  to  kiowa's  father.  impersonal  this  time.  an  officer  expressing  an
officer's condolences. no apologies were necessary, because in fact it was
one  of  those  freak  things,  and  the  war  was  full  of  freaks,  and  nothing
could ever change it anyway. which was the truth, he thought. the exact
truth.

lieutenant  cross  went  deeper  into  the  muck,  the  dark  water  at  his

throat, and tried to tell himself it was the truth.

beside  him,  a  few  steps  off  to  the  left,  the  young  soldier  was  still
searching for his girlfriend's picture. still remembering how he had killed
kiowa.

the boy wanted to confess. he wanted to tell the lieutenant how in the
middle of the night he had pulled out billie's picture and passed it over to
kiowa  and  then  switched  on  the  flashlight,  and  how  kiowa  had
whispered,  "hey,  she's  cute,"  and  how  for  a  second  the  flashlight  had
made billie's face sparkle, and how right then the field had exploded all
around  them.  the  flashlight  had  done  it.  like  a  target  shining  in  the
dark.

the boy looked up at the sky, then at jimmy cross.
"sir?" he said.
the rain and mist moved across the field in broad, sweeping sheets of

gray. close by, there was thunder.

"sir," the boy said, "i got to explain something."
but  lieutenant  jimmy  cross  wasn't  listening.  eyes  closed,  he  let
himself  go  deeper  into  the  waste,  just  letting  the  field  take  him.  he  lay
back and floated.

when  a  man  died,  there  had  to  be  blame.  jimmy  cross  understood
this. you could blame the war. you could blame the idiots who made the
war.  you  could  blame  kiowa  for  going  to  it.  you  could  blame  the  rain.



you  could  blame  the  river.  you  could  blame  the  field,  the  mud,  the
climate.  you  could  blame  the  enemy.  you  could  blame  the  mortar
rounds. you could blame people who were too lazy to read a newspaper,
who were bored by the daily body counts, who switched channels at the
mention  of  politics.  you  could  blame  whole  nations.  you  could  blame
god. you could blame the munitions makers or karl marx or a trick of
fate or an old man in omaha who forgot to vote.

in  the  field,  though,  the  causes  were  immediate.  a  moment  of
carelessness  or  bad  judgment  or  plain  stupidity  carried  consequences
that lasted forever.

for  a  long  while  jimmy  cross  lay  floating.  in  the  clouds  to  the  east
there was the sound of a helicopter, but he did not take notice. with his
eyes  still  closed,  bobbing  in  the  field,  he  let  himself  slip  away.  he  was
back  home  in  new  jersey.  a  golden  afternoon  on  the  golf  course,  the
fairways lush and green, and he was teeing it up on the first hole. it was a
world without responsibility. when the war was over, he thought, maybe
then he would write a letter to kiowa's father. or maybe not. maybe he
would just take a couple of practice swings and knock the ball down the
middle and pick up his clubs and walk off into the afternoon.

good form


it's time to be blunt.
i'm forty-three years old, true, and i'm a writer now, and a long time

ago i walked through quang ngai province as a foot soldier.

almost everything else is invented.
but it's not a game. it's a form. right here, now, as i invent myself, i'm
thinking of all i want to tell you about why this book is written as it is.
for instance, i want to tell you this: twenty years ago i watched a man
die  on  a  trail  near  the  village  of  my  khe.  i  did  not  kill  him.  but  i  was
present, you see, and my presence was guilt enough. i remember his face,
which  was  not  a  pretty  face,  because  his  jaw  was  in  his  throat,  and  i
remember feeling the burden of responsibility and grief. i blamed myself.
and rightly so, because i was present.

but listen. even that story is made up.



i  want  you  to  feel  what  i  felt.  i  want  you  to  know  why  story-truth  is

truer sometimes than happening-truth.

here  is  the  happening-truth.  i  was  once  a  soldier.  there  were  many
bodies, real bodies with real faces, but i was young then and i was afraid
to look. and now, twenty years later, i'm left with faceless responsibility
and faceless grief.

here is the story-truth. he was a slim, dead, almost dainty young man
of about twenty. he lay in the center of a red clay trail near the village of
my khe. his jaw was in his throat. his one eye was shut, the other eye
was a star-shaped hole. i killed him.

what stories can do, i guess, is make things present.
i  can  look  at  things  i  never  looked  at.  i  can  attach  faces  to  grief  and

love and pity and god. i can be brave. i can make myself feel again.

"daddy, tell the truth," kathleen can say, "did you ever kill anybody?"

and i can say, honestly, "of course not."

or i can say, honestly, "yes."


field trip


a  few  months  after  completing  "in  the  field,"  i  returned  with  my
daughter  to  vietnam,  where  we  visited  the  site  of  kiowa's  death,  and
where i looked for signs of forgiveness or personal grace or whatever else
the  land  might  offer.  the  field  was  still  there,  though  not  as  i
remembered  it.  much  smaller,  i  thought,  and  not  nearly  so  menacing,
and in the bright sunlight it was hard to picture what had happened on
this ground some twenty years ago. except for a few marshy spots along
the  river,  everything  was  bone  dry.  no  ghosts—just  a  flat,  grassy  field.
the place was at peace. there were yellow butterflies. there was a breeze
and a wide blue sky. along the river two old farmers stood in ankle-deep
water,  repairing  the  same  narrow  dike  where  we  had  laid  out  kiowa's
body after pulling him from the muck. things were quiet. at one point, i
remember,  one  of  the  farmers  looked  up  and  shaded  his  eyes,  staring
across the field at us, then after a time he wiped his forehead and went
back to work.

i  stood  with  my  arms  folded,  feeling  the  grip  of  sentiment  and  time.

amazing, i thought. twenty years.



behind  me,  in  the  jeep,  my  daughter  kathleen  sat  waiting  with  a
government interpreter, and now and then i could hear the two of them
talking in soft voices. they were already fast friends. neither of them, i
think, understood what all this was about, why i'd insisted that we search
out  this  spot.  it  had  been  a  hard  two-hour  ride  from  quang  ngai  city,
bumpy dirt roads and a hot august sun, ending up at an empty field on
the edge of nowhere.

i took out my camera, snapped a couple of pictures, then stood gazing
out at the field. after a time kathleen got out of the jeep and stood beside
me.

"you know what i think?" she said. "i think this place stinks. it smells

like . . . god, i don't even know what. it smells rotten."

"it sure does. i know that."
"so when can we go?"
"pretty soon," i said.
she  started  to  say  something  but  then  hesitated.  frowning,  she
squinted out at the field for a second, then shrugged and walked back to
the jeep.


kathleen  had  just  turned  ten,  and  this  trip  was  a  kind  of  birthday
present,  showing  her  the  world,  offering  a  small  piece  of  her  father's
history. for the most part she'd held up well—far better than i—and over
the first two weeks she'd trooped along without complaint as we hit the
obligatory  tourist  stops.  ho  chi  minh's  mausoleum  in  hanoi.  a  model
farm  outside  saigon.  the  tunnels  at  cu  chi.  the  monuments  and
government offices and orphanages. through most of this, kathleen had
seemed to enjoy the foreignness of it all, the exotic food and animals, and
even  during  those  periods  of  boredom  and  discomfort  she'd  kept  up  a
good-humored tolerance. at the same time, however, she'd seemed a bit
puzzled. the war was as remote to her as cavemen and dinosaurs.

one morning in saigon she'd asked what it was all about. "this whole

war," she said, "why was everybody so mad at everybody else?"

i shook my head. "they weren't mad, exactly. some people wanted one

thing, other people wanted another thing."

"what did you want?"
"nothing," i said. "to stay alive."



"that's all?"
"yes."
kathleen sighed. "well, i don't get it. i mean, how come you were even

here in the first place?"

"i don't know," i said. "because i had to be."
"but why?"
i  tried  to  find  something  to  tell  her,  but  finally  i  shrugged  and  said,

"it's a mystery, i guess. i don't know."

for  the  rest  of  the  day  she  was  very  quiet.  that  night,  though,  just
before  bedtime,  kathleen  put  her  hand  on  my  shoulder  and  said,  "you
know something? sometimes you're pretty weird, aren't you?"

"well, no," i said.
"you  are  too."  she  pulled  her  hand  away  and  frowned  at  me.  "like
coming  over  here.  some  dumb  thing  happens  a  long  time  ago  and  you
can't ever forget it."
"and that's bad?"
"no," she said quietly. "that's weird."



in  the  second  week  of  august,  near  the  end  of  our  stay,  i'd  arranged
for  the  side  trip  up  to  quang  ngai.  the  tourist  stuff  was  fine,  but  from
the  start  i'd  wanted  to  take  my  daughter  to  the  places  i'd  seen  as  a
soldier. i wanted to show her the vietnam that kept me awake at night—a
shady  trail  outside  the  village  of  my  khe,  a  filthy  old  pigsty  on  the
batangan peninsula. our time was short, however, and choices had to be
made, and in the end i decided to take her to this piece of ground where
my  friend  kiowa  had  died.  it  seemed  appropriate.  and,  besides,  i  had
business here.

now,  looking  out  at  the  field,  i  wondered  if  it  was  all  a  mistake.
everything was too ordinary. a quiet sunny day, and the field was not the
field i remembered. i pictured kiowa's face, the way he used to smile, but
all i felt was the awkwardness of remembering.

behind  me,  kathleen  let  out  a  little  giggle.  the  interpreter  was

showing her magic tricks.

there were birds and butterflies, the soft rustlings of rural-anywhere.
below, in the earth, the relics of our presence were no doubt still there,
the  canteens  and  bandoliers  and  mess  kits.  this  little  field,  i  thought,



had swallowed so much. my best friend. my pride. my belief in myself as
a  man  of  some  small  dignity  and  courage.  still,  it  was  hard  to  find  any
real emotion. it simply wasn't there. after that long night in the rain, i'd
seemed to grow cold inside, all the illusions gone, all the old ambitions
and  hopes  for  myself  sucked  away  into  the  mud.  over  the  years,  that
coldness  had  never  entirely  disappeared.  there  were  times  in  my  life
when i couldn't feel much, not sadness or pity or passion, and somehow i
blamed this place for what i had become, and i blamed it for taking away
the person i had once been. for twenty years this field had embodied all
the waste that was vietnam, all the vulgarity and horror.

now,  it  was  just  what  it  was.  flat  and  dreary  and  unremarkable.  i
walked up toward the river, trying to pick out specific landmarks, but all
i  recognized  was  a  small  rise  where  jimmy  cross  had  set  up  his
command  post  that  night.  nothing  else.  for  a  while  i  watched  the  two
old farmers working under the hot sun. i took a few more photographs,
waved at the farmers, then turned and moved back to the jeep.

kathleen gave me a little nod.
"well," she said, "i hope you're having fun."
"sure."
"can we go now?"
"in a minute," i said. "just relax."
at the back of the jeep i found the small cloth bundle i'd carried over

from the states.

kathleen's eyes narrowed. "what's that?"
"stuff," i told her.
she  glanced  at  the  bundle  again,  then  hopped  out  of  the  jeep  and
followed me back to the field. we walked past jimmy cross's command
post, past the spot where kiowa had gone under, down to where the field
dipped into the marshland along the river. i took off my shoes and socks.

"okay," kathleen said, "what's going on?"
"a quick swim."
"where?"
"right here," i said. "stay put."
she  watched  me  unwrap  the  cloth  bundle.  inside  were  kiowa's  old

moccasins.



i stripped down to my underwear, took off my wrist-watch, and waded
in. the water was warm against my feet. instantly, i recognized the soft,
fat feel of the bottom. the water here was eight inches deep.

kathleen  seemed  nervous.  she  squinted  at  me,  her  hands  fluttering.
"listen, this is stupid," she said, "you can't even hardly get wet. how can
you swim out there?"

"i'll manage."
"but  it's  not  ...  i  mean,  god,  it's  not  even  water,  it's  like  mush  or

something."

she  pinched  her  nose  and  watched  me  wade  out  to  where  the  water
reached my knees. roughly here, i decided, was where mitchell sanders
had found kiowa's rucksack. i eased myself down, squatting at first, then
sitting.  there  was  again  that  sense  of  recognition.  the  water  rose  to
midchest, a deep greenish brown, almost hot. small water bugs skipped
along  the  surface.  right  here,  i  thought.  leaning  forward,  i  reached  in
with the moccasins and wedged them into the soft bottom, letting them
slide  away.  tiny  bubbles  broke  along  the  surface.  i  tried  to  think  of
something  decent  to  say,  something  meaningful  and  right,  but  nothing
came to me.

i looked down into the field.
"well," i finally managed. "there it is."
my  voice  surprised  me.  it  had  a  rough,  chalky  sound,  full  of  things  i
did  not  know  were  there.  i  wanted  to  tell  kiowa  that  he'd  been  a  great
friend, the very best, but all i could do was slap hands with the water.

the sun made me squint. twenty years. a lot like yesterday, a lot like
never.  in  a  way,  maybe,  i'd  gone  under  with  kiowa,  and  now  after  two
decades i'd finally worked my way out. a hot afternoon, a bright august
sun, and the war was over. for a few moments i could not bring myself
to move. like waking from a summer nap, feeling lazy and sluggish, the
world collecting itself around me. fifty meters up the field one of the old
farmers  stood  watching  from  along  the  dike.  the  man's  face  was  dark
and  solemn.  as  we  stared  at  each  other,  neither  of  us  moving,  i  felt
something go shut in my heart while something else swung open. briefly,
i wondered if the old man might walk over to exchange a few war stories,
but instead he picked up a shovel and raised it over his head and held it
there for a time, grimly, like a flag, then he brought the shovel down and



said  something  to  his  friend  and  began  digging  into  the  hard,  dry
ground.

i stood up and waded out of the water.
"what  a  mess,"  kathleen  said.  "all  that  gunk  on  your  skin,  you  look
like  .  .  .  wait'll  i  tell  mommy,  she'll  probably  make  you  sleep  in  the
garage."

"you're right," i said. "don't tell her."
i pulled on my shoes, took my daughter's hand, and led her across the

field toward the jeep. soft heat waves shimmied up out of the earth.

when  we  reached  the  jeep,  kathleen  turned  and  glanced  out  at  the

field.

"that old man," she said, "is he mad at you or something?"
"i hope not."
"he looks mad."
"no," i said. "all that's finished."


the ghost soldiers


i was shot twice. the first time, out by tri binh, it knocked me against
the pagoda wall, and i bounced and spun around and ended up on rat
kiley's  lap.  a  lucky  thing,  because  rat  was  the  medic.  he  tied  on  a
compress and told me to ease back, then he ran off toward the fighting.
for a long time i lay there all alone, listening to the battle, thinking i've
been shot, i've been shot: all those gene autry movies i'd seen as a kid.
in fact, i almost smiled, except then i started to think i might die. it was
the  fear,  mostly,  but  i  felt  wobbly,  and  then  i  had  a  sinking  sensation,
ears all plugged up, as if i'd gone deep under water. thank god for rat
kiley.  every  so  often,  maybe  four  times  altogether,  he  trotted  back  to
check me out. which took courage. it was a wild fight, guys running and
laying down fire and regrouping and running again, lots of noise, but rat
kiley  took  the  risks.  "easy  does  it,"  he  told  me,  "just  a  side  wound,  no
problem unless you're pregnant." he ripped off the compress, applied a
fresh one, and told me to clamp it in place with my fingers. "press hard,"
he  said.  "don't  worry  about  the  baby."  then  he  took  off.  it  was  almost
dark when the fighting ended and the chopper came to take me and two



dead  guys  away.  "happy  trails,"  rat  said.  he  helped  me  into  the
helicopter and stood there for a moment. then he did an odd thing. he
leaned in and put his head against my shoulder and almost hugged me.
coming from rat kiley, that was something new.

on the ride into chu lai, i kept waiting for the pain to hit, but in fact i

didn't feel much. a throb, that's all. even in the hospital it wasn't bad.

when  i  got  back  to  alpha  company  twenty-six  days  later,  in  mid-
december, rat kiley had been wounded and shipped off to japan, and a
new medic named bobby jorgenson had replaced him. jorgenson was no
rat kiley. he was green and incompetent and scared. so when i got shot
the second time, in the butt, along the song tra bong, it took the son of a
bitch  almost  ten  minutes  to  work  up  the  nerve  to  crawl  over  to  me.  by
then i was gone with the pain. later i found out i'd almost died of shock.
bobby  jorgenson  didn't  know  about  shock,  or  if  he  did,  the  fear  made
him forget. to make it worse, he bungled the patch job, and a couple of
weeks later my ass started to rot away. you could actually peel off chunks
of skin with your fingernail.

it  was  borderline  gangrene.  i  spent  a  month  flat  on  my  stomach;  i
couldn't  walk  or  sit;  i  couldn't  sleep.  i  kept  seeing  bobby  jorgenson's
scared-white  face.  those  buggy  eyes  and  the  way  his  lips  twitched  and
that silly excuse he had for a mustache. after the rot cleared up, once i
could think straight, i devoted a lot of time to figuring ways to get back at
him.


getting shot should be an experience from which you can draw some
small pride. i don't mean the macho stuff. all i mean is that you should
be able to talk about it: the stiff thump of the bullet, like a fist, the way it
knocks  the  air  out  of  you  and  makes  you  cough,  how  the  sound  of  the
gunshot arrives about ten years later, and the dizzy feeling, the smell of
yourself, the things you think about and say and do right afterward, the
way your eyes focus on a tiny white pebble or a blade of grass and how
you start thinking, oh man, that's the last thing i'll ever see, that pebble,
that blade of grass, which makes you want to cry.

pride isn't the right word. i don't know the right word. all i know is,

you shouldn't feel embarrassed. humiliation shouldn't be part of it.

diaper rash, the nurses called it. an in-joke, i suppose. but it made me
hate  bobby  jorgenson  the  way  some  guys  hated  the  vc,  gut  hate,  the
kind of hate that stays with you even in your dreams.





i  guess  the  higher-ups  decided  i'd  been  shot  enough.  at  the  end  of
december,  when  i  was  released  from  the  91st  evac  hospital,  they
transferred  me  over  to  headquarters  company—s-4,  the  battalion
supply  section.  compared  with  the  boonies  it  was  cushy  duty.  we  had
regular hours. there was an em club with beer and movies, sometimes
even live floor shows, the whole blurry slow motion of the rear. for the
first  time  in  months  i  felt  reasonably  safe.  the  battalion  firebase  was
built into a hill just off highway 1, surrounded on all sides by flat paddy
land, and between us and the paddies there were reinforced bunkers and
observation towers and trip flares and rolls of razor-tipped barbed wire.
you  could  still  die,  of  course—once  a  month  we'd  get  hit  with  mortar
fire—but  you  could  also  die  in  the  bleachers  at  met  stadium  in
minneapolis, bases loaded, harmon killebrew coming to the plate.

i  didn't  complain.  in  an  odd  way,  though,  there  were  times  when  i
missed the adventure, even the danger, of the real war out in the boonies.
it's  a  hard  thing  to  explain  to  somebody  who  hasn't  felt  it,  but  the
presence of death and danger has a way of bringing you fully awake. it
makes things vivid. when you're afraid, really afraid, you see things you
never saw before, you pay attention to the world. you make close friends.
you  become  part  of  a  tribe  and  you  share  the  same  blood—you  give  it
together,  you  take  it  together.  on  the  other  hand,  i'd  already  been  hit
with two bullets; i was superstitious; i believed in the odds with the same
passion  that  my  friend  kiowa  had  once  believed  in  jesus  christ,  or  the
way mitchell sanders believed in the power of morals. i figured my war
was  over.  if  it  hadn't  been  for  the  constant  ache  in  my  butt,  i'm  sure
things would've worked out fine.

but it hurt.
at night i had to sleep on my belly. that doesn't sound so terrible until
you  consider  that  i'd  been  a  back-sleeper  all  my  life.  i'd  lie  there  all
fidgety and tight, then after a while i'd feel a swell of anger come on. i'd
squirm  around,  cussing,  half  nuts  with  pain,  and  pretty  soon  i'd  start
remembering  how  bobby  jorgenson  had  almost  killed  me.  shock,  i'd
think—how could he forget to treat for shock?

i'd remember how long it took him to get to me, and how his fingers
were all jerky and nervous, and the way his lips kept twitching under that
ridiculous little mustache.



the  nights  were  miserable.  sometimes  i'd  roam  around  the  base.  i'd
head down to the wire and stare out at the darkness, out where the war
was, and think up ways to make bobby jorgenson feel exactly what i felt.
i wanted to hurt him.


in march, alpha company came in for stand-down. i was there at the
helipad  to  meet  the  choppers.  mitchell  sanders  and  azar  and  henry
dobbins and dave jensen and norman bowker slapped hands with me
and  we  piled  their  gear  in  my  jeep  and  drove  down  to  the  alpha
hootches. we partied until chow time. afterward, we kept on partying. it
was  one  of  the  rituals.  even  if  you  weren't  in  the  mood,  you  did  it  on
principle.

by midnight it was story time.
"morty phillips used up his luck," bowker said.
i  smiled  and  waited.  there  was  a  tempo  to  how  stories  got  told.

bowker peeled open a finger blister and sucked on it.

"go on," azar said. "tell him everything."
"well, that's about it. poor morty wasted his luck. pissed it away."
"on nothing," azar said. "the dummy pisses it away on nothing."
norman  bowker  nodded,  started  to  speak,  but  then  stopped  and  got
up and moved to the cooler and shoved his hands deep into the ice. he
was naked except for his shorts and dog tags. in a way, i envied him—all
of them. their deep bush tans, the sores and blisters, the stories, the in-
it-togethemess.  i  felt  close  to  them,  yes,  but  i  also  felt  a  new  sense  of
separation. my fatigues were starched; i had a neat haircut and the clean,
sterile smell of the rear. they were still my buddies, at least on one level,
but once you leave the boonies, the whole comrade business gets turned
around. you become a civilian. you forfeit membership in the family, the
blood fraternity, and no matter how hard you try, you can't pretend to be
part of it.

that's how i felt—like a civilian—and it made me sad. these guys had

been my brothers. we'd loved one another.

norman  bowker  bent  forward  and  scooped  up  some  ice  against  his
chest,  pressing  it  there  for  a  moment,  then  he  fished  out  a  beer  and
snapped it open.

"it was out by my khe," he said quietly. "one of those killer hot days,
hot-hot,  and  we're  all  popping  salt  tabs  just  to  stay  conscious.  can't



barely  breathe.  everybody's  lying  around,  just  grooving  it,  and  after  a
while  somebody  says,  'hey,  where's  morty?'  so  the  lieutenant  does  a
head count, and guess what? no morty."

"gone," ealasaid. "poof. novocain' morty."
norman  bowker  nodded.  "anyhow,  we  send  out  two  search  patrols.
no dice. not a trace." pausing a second, bowker poured a trickle of beer
onto  his  blister  and  licked  at  it.  "by  then  it's  almost  dark.  lieutenant
cross, he's ready to have a fit—you know how he gets, right?—and then,
guess what? take a guess."

"morty shows," i said.
"you got it, man. morty shows. we almost chalk him up as mia, and

then, bingo, he shows."

"soaking wet," said azar.
"hey, listen—"
"okay, but tell it."
norman  bowker  frowned.  "soaking  wet,"  he  said.  "turns  out  the
moron  went  for  a  swim.  you  believe  that?  all  alone,  he  just  takes  off,
hikes a couple klicks, finds himself a river and strips down and hops in
and  starts  doing  the  goddamn  breast  stroke  or  some  such  fine  shit.  no
security, no nothing. i mean, the dude goes skinny dipping."

azar giggled. "a hot day."
"not that hot," said dave jensen.
"hot, though."
"get  the  picture?"  bowker  said.  "this  is  my  khe  we're  talking  about,

dinks everywhere, and the guy goes for a swim."

"crazy," i said.
i  looked  across  the  hootch.  twenty  or  thirty  guys  were  there,  some
drinking,  some  passed  out,  but  i  couldn't  find  morty  phillips  among
them.

bowker  smiled.  he  reached  out  and  put  his  hand  on  my  knee  and

squeezed.

"that's the kicker, man. no more morty."
"no?"
"morty's luck gets all used up," bowker said. his hand still rested on
my knee, very lightly. "a few days later, maybe a week, he feels real dizzy.
pukes  a  lot,  temperature  zooms  way  up.  i  mean,  the  guy's  sick.



jorgenson  says  he  must've  swallowed  bad  water  on  that  swim.
swallowed a vc virus or something."

"bobby jorgenson," i said. "where is he?"
"be cool."
"where's my good buddy bobby?"
norman  bowker  made  a  short  clicking  sound  with  his  tongue.  "you

want to hear this? yes or no?"

"sure i do."
"so listen up, then. morty gets sick. like you never seen nobody so bad
off.  this  is  real  kickass  disease,  he  can't  walk  or  talk,  can't  fart.  can't
nothin'. like he's paralyzed. polio, maybe."

henry dobbins shook his head. "not polio. you got it wrong."
"maybe polio."
"no way," said dobbins. "not polio."
"well, hey," bowker said, "i'm just saying what jorgenson says. maybe
fuckin'  polio.  or  that  weird  elephant  disease.  elephantiasshole  or
whatever."

"yeah, but not polio."
across the hootch, sitting off by himself, azar grinned and snapped his
fingers.  "either  way,"  he  said,  "it  goes  to  show  you.  don't  throw  away
luck on little stuff. save it up."

"there it is," said mitchell sanders.
"morty was due," dave jensen said.
"overdue," sanders said.
norman bowker nodded solemnly. "you don't mess around like that.

you just don't fritter away all your luck."

"amen," said sanders.
"fuckin' polio," said henry dobbins.
we sat quietly for a time. there was no need to talk, because we were
thinking the same things: about morty phillips and the way luck worked
and didn't work and how it was impossible to calculate the odds. there
were  a  million  ways  to  die.  getting  shot  was  one  way.  booby  traps  and
land mines and gangrene and shock and polio from a vc virus.


"where's jorgenson?" i said.



another  thing.  three  times  a  day,  no  matter  what,  i  had  to  stop
whatever i was doing. i had to go find a private place and drop my pants
and smear on this antibacterial ointment. the stuff left stains on the seat
of  my  trousers,  big  yellow  splotches,  and  so  naturally  there  were  some
jokes.  there  was  one  about  rear  guard  duty.  there  was  another  one
about  hemorrhoids  and  how  i  had  trouble  putting  the  past  behind  me.
the others weren't quite so funny.

during the first full day of alpha's stand-down, i didn't run into bobby
jorgenson  once.  not  at  chow,  not  at  the  em  club,  not  even  during  our
long booze sessions in the alpha company hootch. at one point i almost
went looking for him, but my friend mitchell sanders told me to forget it.
"let it ride," he said. "the kid messed up bad, for sure, but you have to
take  into  account  how  green  he  was.  brand-new,  remember?  thing  is,
he's  doing  a  lot  better  now.  i  mean,  listen,  the  guy  knows  his  shit.  say
what you want, but he kept morty phillips alive."

"and that makes it okay?"
sanders  shrugged.  "people  change.  situations  change.  i  hate  to  say

this, man, but you're out of touch. jorgenson—he's with us now."

"and i'm not?"
sanders looked at me for a moment.
"no," he said. "i guess you're not."
stiffly, like a stranger, sanders moved across the hootch and lay down

with a magazine and pretended to read.

i felt something shift inside me. it was anger, partly, but it was also a
sense  of  pure  and  total  loss:  i  didn't  fit  anymore.  they  were  soldiers,  i
wasn't. in a few days they'd saddle up and head back into the bush, and
i'd  stand  up  on  the  helipad  to  watch  them  march  away,  and  then  after
they were gone i'd spend the day loading resupply choppers until it was
time  to  catch  a  movie  or  play  cards  or  drink  myself  to  sleep.  a  funny
thing, but i felt betrayed.

for a long while i just stared at mitchell sanders.
"loyalty," i said. "such a pal."



in the morning i ran into bobby jorgenson. i was loading hueys up on
the helipad, and when the last bird took off, while i was putting on my
shirt, i looked over and saw him leaning against my jeep, waiting for me.



it was a surprise. he seemed smaller than i remembered, a little squirrel
of a guy, short and stumpy-looking.

he nodded nervously.
"well," he said.
at  first  i  just  looked  down  at  his  boots.  those  boots:  i  remembered
them from when i got shot. out along the song tra bong, a bullet inside
me, all that pain, but for some reason what stuck to my memory was the
smooth  unblemished  leather  of  his  fine  new  boots.  factory  black,  no
scuffs or dust or red clay. the boots were one of those vivid details you
can't forget. like a pebble or a blade of grass, you just stare and think,
dear christ, there's the last thing on earth i'll ever see.

jorgenson  blinked  and  tried  to  smile.  oddly,  i  almost  felt  some  pity

for him.

"look," he said, "can we talk?"
i  didn't  move.  i  didn't  say  a  word.  jorgenson's  tongue  flicked  out,

moving along the edge of his mustache, then slipped away.

"listen,  man,  i  fucked  up,"  he  said.  "what  else  can  i  say?  i'm  sorry.
when you got hit, i kept telling myself to move, move, but i couldn't do
it, like i was full of drugs or something. you ever feel like that? like you
can't even move?"

"no," i said, "i never did."
"but can't you at least—"
"excuses?"
jorgenson's lip twitched. "no, i botched it. period. got all frozen up, i
guess.  the  noise  and  shooting  and  everything—my  first  firefight—i  just
couldn't handle it ... when i heard about the shock, the gangrene, i felt
like ... i felt miserable. nightmares, too. i kept seeing you lying out there,
heard  you  screaming,  but  it  was  like  my  legs  were  filled  up  with  sand,
they didn't work. i'd keep trying but i couldn't make my goddamn legs
work."

he made a small sound in his throat, something low and feathery, and
for  a  second  i  was  afraid  he  might  bawl.  that  would've  ended  it.  i
would've  patted  his  shoulder  and  told  him  to  forget  it.  but  he  kept
control.  he  swallowed  whatever  the  sound  was  and  forced  a  smile  and
tried to shake my hand. it gave me an excuse to glare at him.

"it's not that easy," i said.



"tim, i can't go back and do things over."
"my ass."
jorgenson kept pushing his hand out at me. he looked so earnest, so
sad and hurt, that it almost made me feel guilty. not quite, though. after
a  second  i  muttered  something  and  got  into  my  jeep  and  put  it  to  the
floor and left him standing there.

i hated him for making me stop hating him.



something  had  gone  wrong.  i'd  come  to  this  war  a  quiet,  thoughtful
sort of person, a college grad, phi beta kappa and summa cum laude, all
the credentials, but after seven months in the bush i realized that those
high, civilized trappings had somehow been crushed under the weight of
the  simple  daily  realities.  i'd  turned  mean  inside.  even  a  little  cruel  at
times. for all my education, all my fine liberal values, i now felt a deep
coldness inside me, something dark and beyond reason. it's a hard thing
to  admit,  even  to  myself,  but  i  was  capable  of  evil.  i  wanted  to  hurt
bobby jorgenson the way he'd hurt me. for weeks it had been a vow—i'll
get him, i'll get him—it was down inside me like a rock. granted, i didn't
hate him anymore, and i'd lost some of the outrage and passion, but the
need  for  revenge  kept  eating  at  me.  at  night  i  sometimes  drank  too
much.  i'd  remember  getting  shot  and  yelling  out  for  a  medic  and  then
waiting and waiting and waiting, passing out once, then waking up and
screaming  some  more,  and  how  the  screaming  seemed  to  make  new
pain,  the  awful  stink  of  myself,  the  sweat  and  fear,  bobby  jorgenson's
clumsy fingers when he finally got around to working on me. i kept going
over  it  all,  every  detail.  i  remembered  the  soft,  fluid  heat  of  my  own
blood.  shock,  i  thought,  and  i  tried  to  tell  him  that,  but  my  tongue
wouldn't make the connection. i wanted to yell, "you jerk, it's shock—i'm
dying" but all i could do was whinny and squeal. i remembered that, and
the hospital, and the nurses. i even remembered the rage. but i couldn't
feel  it  anymore.  in  the  end,  all  i  felt  was  that  coldness  down  inside  my
chest.  number  one:  the  guy  had  almost  killed  me.  number  two:  there
had to be consequences.

that afternoon i asked mitchell sanders to give me a hand.
"no  pain,"  i  said.  "basic  psychology,  that's  all.  mess  with  his  head  a

little."

"negative," sanders said.



"spook the fucker."
sanders shook his head. "man, you're sick."
"all i want is—"
"sick."
quietly, sanders looked at me for a second and then walked away.
i had to get azar in on it.
he  didn't  have  mitchell  sanders's  intelligence,  but  he  had  a  keener
sense  of  justice.  after  i  explained  the  plan,  azar  gave  me  a  long  white
smile.

"tonight?" he said.
"just don't get carried away."
"me?"
still smiling, azar flicked an eyebrow and started snapping his fingers.
it  was  a  tic  of  his.  whenever  things  got  tense,  whenever  there  was  a
prospect for action, he'd do that snapping thing. nobody cared for him,
including myself.

"understand?" i said.
azar winked. "roger-dodger. only a game, right?"



we  called  the  enemy  ghosts.  "bad  night,"  we'd  say,  "the  ghosts  are
out." to get spooked, in the lingo, meant not only to get scared but to get
killed. "don't get spooked," we'd say. "stay cool, stay alive." or we'd say:
"careful,  man,  don't  give  up  the  ghost."  the  countryside  itself  seemed
spooky—shadows and tunnels and incense burning in the dark. the land
was  haunted.  we  were  fighting  forces  that  did  not  obey  the  laws  of
twentieth-century science. late at night, on guard, it seemed that all of
vietnam was alive and shimmering—odd shapes swaying in the paddies,
boogiemen  in  sandals,  spirits  dancing  in  old  pagodas.  it  was  ghost
country, and charlie cong was the main ghost. the way he came out at
night.  how  you  never  really  saw  him,  just  thought  you  did.  almost
magical—appearing,  disappearing.  he  could  blend  with  the  land,
changing form, becoming trees and grass. he could levitate. he could fly.
he could pass through barbed wire and melt away like ice and creep up
on you without sound or footsteps. he was scary. in the daylight, maybe,
you didn't believe in this stuff. you laughed it off. you made jokes. but at
night you turned into a believer: no skeptics in foxholes.



azar  was  wound  up  tight.  all  afternoon,  while  we  made  the
preparations, he kept chanting, "halloween, halloween." that, plus the
finger snapping, almost made me cancel the whole operation. i went hot
and cold. mitchell sanders wouldn't speak to me, which tended to cool it
off,  but  then  i'd  start  remembering  things.  the  result  was  a  kind  of
numbness. no ice, no heat. i just went through the motions, rigidly, by
the numbers, without any heart or real emotion. i rigged up my special
effects,  checked  out  the  terrain,  measured  distances,  collected  the
ordnance and equipment we'd need. i was professional enough about it, i
didn't make mistakes, but somehow it felt as if i were gearing up to fight
somebody else's war. i didn't have that patriotic zeal.

if  there  had  been  a  dignified  way  out,  i  might've  taken  it.  during
evening  chow,  in  fact,  i  kept  staring  across  the  mess  hall  at  bobby
jorgenson, and when he finally looked up at me, almost nodding, i came
very close to calling it quits. maybe i was fishing for something. one last
apology—something public. but jorgenson only gazed back at me. it was
a  strange  gaze,  too,  straight  on  and  unafraid,  as  if  apologies  were  no
longer  required.  he  was  sitting  there  with  dave  jensen  and  mitchell
sanders and a few others, and he seemed to fit in very nicely, all smiles
and group rapport.

that's probably what cinched it.
i went back to my hootch, showered, shaved, threw my helmet against
the wall, lay down for a while, got up, prowled around, talked to myself,
applied some fresh ointment, then headed off to find azar.

just before dusk, alpha company stood for roll call.
afterward the men separated into two groups. some went off to write
letters or party or sleep; the others trooped down to the base perimeter,
where, for the next eleven hours, they would pull night guard duty. it was
sop—one night on, one night off.

this was jorgenson's night on. i knew that in advance, of course. and
i  knew  his  bunker  assignment:  bunker  six,  a  pile  of  sandbags  at  the
southwest  corner  of  the  perimeter.  that  morning  i'd  scouted  out  every
inch of his position; i knew the blind spots and the little ripples of land
and the places where he'd take cover in case of trouble. but still, just to
guard  against  freak  screw-ups,  azar  and  i  tailed  him  down  to  the  wire.
we watched him lay out his poncho and connect his claymores to their
firing  devices.  softly,  like  a  little  boy,  he  was  whistling  to  himself.  he



tested  his  radio,  unwrapped  a  candy  bar,  then  sat  back  with  his  rifle
cradled to his chest like a teddy bear.

"a  pigeon,"  azar  whispered.  "roast  pigeon  on  a  spit.  i  smell  it

sizzling."

"except this isn't for real."
azar shrugged. after a second he reached out and clapped me on the
shoulder, not roughly but not gently either. "what's real?" he said. "eight
months  in  fantasyland,  it  tends  to  blur  the  line.  honest  to  god,  i
sometimes can't remember what real is."


psychology—that was one thing i knew. you don't try to scare people
in  broad  daylight.  you  wait.  because  the  darkness  squeezes  you  inside
yourself,  you  get  cut  off  from  the  outside  world,  the  imagination  takes
over. that's basic psychology. i'd pulled enough night guard to know how
the fear factor gets multiplied as you sit there hour after hour, nobody to
talk  to,  nothing  to  do  but  stare  into  the  big  black  hole  at  the  center  of
your own sorry soul. the hours go by and you lose your gyroscope; your
mind starts to roam. you think about dark closets, madmen, murderers
under the bed, all those childhood fears. gremlins and trolls and giants.
you try to block it out but you can't. you see ghosts. you blink and shake
your  head.  bullshit,  you  tell  yourself.  but  then  you  remember  the  guys
who died: curt lemon, kiowa, ted lavender, a half-dozen others whose
faces you can't bring into focus anymore. and then pretty soon you start
to ponder the stories you've heard about charlie's magic. the time some
guys cornered two vc in a dead-end tunnel, no way out, but how, when
the tunnel was fragged and searched, nothing was found except a pile of
dead rats. a hundred stories. ghosts wiping out a whole marine platoon
in twenty seconds flat. ghosts rising from the dead. ghosts behind you
and in front of you and inside you. after a while, as the night deepens,
you  feel  a  funny  buzzing  in  your  ears.  tiny  sounds  get  heightened  and
distorted. the crickets talk in code; the night takes on a weird electronic
tingle. you hold your breath. you coil up and tighten your muscles and
listen, knuckles hard, the pulse ticking in your head. you hear the spooks
laughing.  no  shit,  laughing.  you  jerk  up,  you  freeze,  you  squint  at  the
dark.  nothing,  though.  you  put  your  weapon  on  full  automatic.  you
crouch lower and count your grenades and make sure the pins are bent
for quick throwing and take a deep breath and listen and try not to freak.
and then later, after enough time passes, things start to get bad.





"come on," azar said, "let's do it," but i told him to be patient. waiting
was  the  trick.  so  we  went  to  the  movies,  barbarella  again,  the  eighth
straight  night.  a  lousy  movie,  i  thought,  but  it  kept  azar  occupied.  he
was crazy about jane fonda. "sweet janie," he kept saying. "sweet janie
boosts a man's morale." then, with his hand, he showed me which part
of  his  morale  got  boosted.  it  was  an  old  joke.  everything  was  old.  the
movie, the heat, the booze, the war. i fell asleep during the second reel—a
hot, angry sleep—and forty minutes later i woke up to a sore ass and a
foul temper.

it wasn't yet midnight.
we hiked over to the em club and worked our way through a six-pack.
mitchell sanders was there, at another table, but he pretended not to see
me.

around closing time, i nodded at azar.
"well, goody gumdrop," he said.
we  went  over  to  my  hootch,  picked  up  our  gear,  and  then  moved
through the night down to the wire. i felt like a soldier again. back in the
bush, it seemed. we observed good field discipline, not talking, keeping
to the shadows and joining in with the darkness. when we came up on
bunker six, azar lifted his thumb and peeled away from me and began
circling  to  the  south.  old  times,  i  thought.  a  kind  of  thrill,  a  kind  of
dread.

quietly, i shouldered my gear and crossed over to a heap of boulders
that overlooked jorgenson's position. i was directly behind him. thirty-
two  meters  away,  exactly.  even  in  the  heavy  darkness,  no  moon  yet,  i
could make out the kid's silhouette: a helmet, a pair of shoulders, a rifle
barrel. his back was to me. he gazed out at the wire and at the paddies
beyond, where the danger was.

i knelt down and took out ten flares and unscrewed the caps and lined
them  up  in  front  of  me  and  then  checked  my  wristwatch.  still  five
minutes to go. edging over to my left, i groped for the ropes i'd set up
that  afternoon.  i  found  them,  tested  the  tension,  and  checked  the  time
again.  four  minutes.  there  was  a  light  feeling  in  my  head,  fluttery  and
taut at the same time. i remembered it from the boonies. giddiness and
doubt and awe, all those things and a million more. you wonder if you're
dreaming.  it's  like  you're  in  a  movie.  there's  a  camera  on  you,  so  you



begin acting, you're somebody else. you think of all the films you've seen,
audie murphy and gary cooper and the cisco kid, all those heroes, and
you  can't  help  falling  back  on  them  as  models  of  proper  comportment.
on  ambush,  curled  in  the  dark,  you  fight  for  control.  not  too  much
fidgeting.  you  rearrange  your  posture;  you  try  for  a  grin;  you  measure
out your breathing. eyes open, be alert—old imperatives, old movies. it
all  swirls  together,  cliches  mixing  with  your  own  emotions,  and  in  the
end you can't tell one from the other.

there was that coldness inside me. i wasn't myself. i felt hollow and

dangerous.

i took a breath, fingered the first rope, and gave it a sharp little jerk.
instantly there was a clatter outside the wire. i expected the noise, i was
even tensed for it, but still my heart took a hop.

now, i thought. now it starts.
eight  ropes  altogether.  i  had  four,  azar  had  four.  each  rope  was
hooked  up  to  a  homemade  noisemaker  out  in  front  of  jorgenson's
bunker—eight ammo cans filled with rifle cartridges. simple devices, but
they worked. i waited a moment, and then, very gently, i gave all four of
my  ropes  a  little  tug.  delicate,  nothing  loud.  if  you  weren't  listening,
listening  hard,  you  might've  missed  it.  but  jorgenson  was  listening.  at
the first low rattle, his silhouette seemed to freeze.

another rattle: azar this time. we kept at it for ten minutes, staggering

the rhythm—noise, silence, noise—gradually building the tension.

squinting  down  at  jorgenson's  position,  i  felt  a  swell  of  immense
power. it was a feeling the vc must have. like a puppeteer. yank on the
ropes, watch the silly wooden soldier jump and twitch. it made me smile.
one by one, in sequence, i tugged on each of the ropes, and the sounds
came  flowing  back  at  me  with  a  soft,  indefinite  formlessness:  a
rattlesnake, maybe, or the creak of a trap door, or footsteps in the attic—
whatever you made of it.

in a way i wanted to stop myself. it was cruel, i knew that, but right

and wrong were somewhere else. this was the spirit world.

i heard myself laugh.
and  then  presently  i  came  unattached  from  the  natural  world.  i  felt
the hinges go. eyes closed, i seemed to rise up out of my own body and
float  through  the  dark  down  to  jorgenson's  position.  i  was  invisible;  i
had no shape, no substance; i weighed less than nothing. i just drifted. it



was  imagination,  of  course,  but  for  a  long  while  i  hovered  there  over
bobby jorgenson's bunker. as if through dark glass i could see him lying
flat  in  his  circle  of  sandbags,  silent  and  scared,  listening.  rubbing  his
eyes.  telling  himself  it  was  all  a  trick  of  the  dark.  muscles  tight,  ears
tight—i  could  see  it.  now,  at  this  instant,  he'd  glance  up  at  the  sky,
hoping  for  a  moon  or  a  few  stars.  but  no  moon,  no  stars.  he'd  start
talking  to  himself.  he'd  try  to  bring  the  night  into  focus,  willing
coherence,  but  the  effort  would  only  cause  distortions.  out  beyond  the
wire,  the  paddies  would  seem  to  swirl  and  sway;  the  trees  would  take
human form; clumps of grass would glide through the night like sappers.
funhouse  country:  trick  mirrors  and  curvatures  and  pop-up  monsters.
"take  it  easy,"  he'd  murmur,  "easy,  easy,  easy,"  but  it  wouldn't  get  any
easier.

i could actually see it.
i was down there with him, inside him. i was part of the night. i was
the  land  itself—everything,  everywhere—the  fireflies  and  paddies,  the
moon, the midnight rustlings, the cool phosphorescent shimmer of evil—
i was atrocity—i was jungle fire, jungle drums—i was the blind stare in
the eyes of all those poor, dead, dumbfuck ex-pals of mine—all the pale
young corpses, lee strunk and kiowa and curt lemon—i was the beast
on their lips—i was nam—the horror, the war.


"creepy," azar said. "wet pants an' goose bumps." he held a beer out

to me, but i shook my head.

we  sat  in  the  dim  light  of  my  hootch,  boots  off,  listening  to  mary

hopkin on my tape deck.

"what next?"
"wait," i said.
"sure, but i mean—"
"shut up and listen."
that  high  elegant  voice.  someday,  when  the  war  was  over,  i'd  go  to
london  and  ask  mary  hopkin  to  marry  me.  that's  another  thing  nam
does to you. it turns you sentimental; it makes you want to hook up with
girls like mary hopkin. you learn, finally, that you'll die, and so you try
to  hang  on  to  your  own  life,  that  gentle,  naive  kid  you  used  to  be,  but
then after a while the sentiment takes over, and the sadness, because you



know  for  a  fact  that  you  can't  ever  bring  any  of  it  back  again.  you  just
can't. those were the days, she sang.

azar switched off the tape.
"shit, man," he said. "don't you got music?"



and now, finally, the moon was out. we slipped back to our positions
and  went  to  work  again  with  the  ropes.  louder  now,  more  insistent.
starlight sparkled in the barbed wire, and there were curious reflections
and  layerings  of  shadow,  and  the  big  white  moon  added  resonance.
there  was  no  wind.  the  night  was  absolute.  slowly,  we  dragged  the
ammo cans closer to bobby jorgenson's bunker, and this, plus the moon,
gave a sense of approaching peril, the slow belly-down crawl of evil.

at 0300 hours azar set off the first trip flare.
there  was  a  light  popping  noise,  then  a  sizzle  out  in  front  of  bunker
six. the night seemed to snap itself in half. the white flare burned  ten
paces from the bunker.

i fired off three more flares and it was instant daylight.
then  jorgenson  moved.  he  made  a  short,  low  cry—not  even  a  cry,
really,  just  a  short  lung-and-throat  bark—and  there  was  a  blurred
sequence  as  he  lunged  sideways  and  rolled  toward  a  heap  of  sandbags
and crouched there and hugged his rifle and waited.

"there," i whispered. "now you know."
i could read his mind. i was there with him. together we understood
what terror was: you're not human anymore. you're a shadow. you slip
out of your own skin, like molting, shedding your own history and your
own  future,  leaving  behind  everything  you  ever  were  or  wanted  or
believed in. you know you're about to die. and it's not a movie and you
aren't a hero and all you can do is whimper and wait.

this, now, was something we shared.
i felt close to him. it wasn't compassion, just closeness. his silhouette

was framed like a cardboard cutout against the burning flares.


in the dark outside my hootch, even though i bent toward him, almost

nose to nose, all i could see were the glossy whites of azar's eyes.

"enough," i said.
"oh, sure."



"seriously."
azar gave me a small, thin smile.
"serious?" he said. "that's way too serious for me—i'm your basic fun

lover."

when  he  smiled  again,  i  knew  it  was  hopeless,  but  i  tried  anyway.  i
told him the score was even. we'd made our point, i said, no need to rub
it in.

azar stared at me.
"poor, poor boy," he said. the rest was inflection and white eyes.



an  hour  before  dawn  we  moved  in  for  the  last  phase.  azar  was  in

command now. i tagged after him, thinking maybe i could keep a lid on.
"don't  take  this  personal,"  azar  said  softly.  "it's  my  own  character

flaw. i just like to finish things."

i didn't look at him. as we approached the wire, azar put his hand on
my  shoulder,  guiding  me  over  toward  the  boulder  pile.  he  knelt  down
and  inspected  the  ropes  and  flares,  nodded  to  himself,  peered  out  at
jorgenson's bunker, nodded once more, then took off his helmet and sat
on it.

he was smiling again.
"you  know  something?"  he  said.  his  voice  was  wistful.  "out  here,  at
night,  i  almost  feel  like  a  kid  again.  the  vietnam  experience.  i  mean,
wow, i love this shit."

"let's just—"
"shhhh."
azar put a finger to his lips. he was still smiling at me, almost kindly.
"this here's what you wanted," he said. "displaying war, right? that's
all this is. a cute little backyard war game. brings back memories, i bet—
those happy soldiering days. except now you're a has-been. one of those
american legion types, guys who like to dress up in a nifty uniform and
go out and play at it. pitiful. it was me, i'd rather get my ass blown away
for real."

my lips had a waxy feel, like soapstone.
"come on," i said. "just quit."
"pitiful."



"azar, for christ sake."
he patted my cheek. "purely pitiful," he said.
we waited another ten minutes. it was cold now, and damp. squatting
down, i felt a sudden brittleness come over me, a hollow sensation, as if
someone could reach out and crush me like a christmas tree ornament.
it was the same feeling i'd had out along the song tra bong. like i was
losing myself, everything spilling out. i remembered how the bullet had
made a soft puffing noise inside me. i remembered lying there for a long
while, listening to the river, the gunfire and voices, how i kept calling out
for  a  medic  but  how  nobody  came  and  how  i  finally  reached  back  and
touched  the  hole.  the  blood  was  warm  like  dishwater.  i  could  feel  my
pants filling up with it. all this blood, i thought—i'll be hollow. then the
brittle sensation hit me. i passed out for a while, and when i woke up the
battle had moved farther down the river. i was still leaking. i wondered
where  rat  kiley  was,  but  rat  kiley  was  in  japan.  there  was  rifle  fire
somewhere off to my right, and people yelling, except none of it seemed
real anymore. i smelled myself dying. the round had entered at a steep
angle, smashing down through the hip and colon. the stench made me
jerk sideways. i turned and clamped a hand against the wound and tried
to plug it up. leaking to death, i thought. and then i felt it happen. like
a genie swirling out of a bottle—like a cloud of gas—i was drifting upward
out of my own body. i was half in and half out. part of me still lay there,
the corpse part, but i was also that genie looking on and saying, "there,
there,"  which  made me  start  to  scream.  i  couldn't  help  it.  when  bobby
jorgenson  got  to  me,  i  was  almost  gone  with  shock.  all  i  could  do  was
scream.  i  tightened  up  and  squeezed,  trying  to  stop  the  leak,  but  that
only made it worse, and jorgenson punched me and told me to knock it
off. shock, i thought. i tried to tell him that. i tried to say, "shock," but it
wouldn't come out right. jorgenson flipped me over and pressed a knee
against my back, pinning me there, and i kept trying to say, "shock, man,
treat for shock." i was lucid—things were clear—but my tongue wouldn't
fit  around  the  words.  then  i  slipped  under  for  a  while.  when  i  came
back,  jorgenson  was  using  a  knife  to  cut  off  my  pants.  he  shot  in  the
morphine, which scared me, and i shouted something and tried to wiggle
away,  but  he  kept  pushing  down  hard  on  my  back.  except  it  wasn't
jorgenson  now—it  was  that  genie—he  was  smiling  down  at  me,  and
winking, and i couldn't buck him off. later on, things clicked into slow
motion.  the  morphine,  maybe.  i  focused  on  jorgenson's  brand-new



boots, then on a pebble, then on my own face floating high above me—
the last things i'd ever see. i couldn't look away. it occurred to me that i
was witness to something rare.

even now, in the dark, there were indications of a spirit world.
azar said, "hey, you awake?"
i nodded.
down at bunker six, things were silent. the place looked abandoned.
azar grinned and went to work on the ropes. it began like a breeze, a
soft  sighing  sound.  i  hugged  myself.  i  watched  azar  bend  forward  and
fire off the first illumination flare. "please," i almost said, but the word
snagged, and i looked up and tracked the flare over jorgenson's bunker.
it exploded almost without noise: a soft red flash.

there was a whimper in the dark. at first i thought it was jorgenson.
"please?" i said.
i bit down and folded my hands and squeezed. i had the shivers.
twice more, rapidly, azar fired up red flares. at one point he turned

toward me and lifted his eyebrows.

"timmy, timmy," he said. "such a specimen."
i agreed.
i  wanted  to  do  something,  stop  him  somehow,  but  i  crouched  back
and watched azar pick up a tear-gas grenade and pull the pin and stand
up  and  throw.  the  gas  puffed  up  in  a  thin  cloud  that  partly  obscured
bunker six. even from thirty meters away i could smell it and taste it.

"jesus,  please,"  i  said,  but  azar  lobbed  over  another  one,  waited  for

the hiss, then scrambled over to the rope we hadn't used yet.

it  was  my  idea.  i'd  rigged  it  up  myself:  a  sandbag  painted  white,  a

pulley system.

azar  gave  the  rope  a  quick  tug,  and  out  in  front  of  bunker  six,  the

white sandbag lifted itself up and hovered there in a misty swirl of gas.

jorgenson began firing. just one round at first, a single red tracer that

thumped into the sandbag and burned.

"oooo!" azar murmured.
quickly, talking to himself, azar hurled the last gas grenade, shot up
another flare, then snatched the rope again and made the white sandbag
dance.



"oooo!" he was chanting. "starlight, star bright!"
bobby  jorgenson  did  not  go  nuts.  quietly,  almost  with  dignity,  he
stood up and took aim and fired once more at the sandbag. i could see
his profile against the red flares. his face seemed relaxed, no twitching or
screams. he stared out into the dark for several seconds, as if deciding
something, then he shook his head and smiled. he stood up straight. he
seemed  to  brace  himself  for  a  moment.  then,  very  slowly,  he  began
marching out toward the wire; his posture was erect; he did not crouch
or squirm or crawl. he walked upright. he moved with a kind of grace.
when  he  reached  the  sandbag,  jorgenson  stopped  and  turned  and
shouted  out  my  name,  then  he  placed  his  rifle  muzzle  up  against  the
white sandbag.

"o'brien!" he yelled, and he fired.
azar dropped the rope.
"well,"  he  muttered,  "show's  over."  he  looked  down  at  me  with  a
mixture of contempt and pity. after a second he shook his head. "man,
i'll tell you something. you're a sorry, sorry case."

i was trembling. i kept hugging myself, rocking, but i couldn't make it

go away.

"disgusting," azar said. "sorriest fuckin' case i ever seen."
he  looked  out  at  jorgenson,  then  at  me.  his  eyes  had  the  opaque,
polished surface of stone. he moved forward as if to help me up. then he
stopped  and  smiled.  almost  as  an  afterthought,  he  kicked  me  in  the
head.

"sad," he murmured, then he turned and headed off to bed.



"no big deal," i told jorgenson. "leave it alone."
but he led me down to the bunker and used a towel to wipe the gash at
my forehead. it wasn't bad, really. i felt some dizziness, but i tried not to
let it show.

it  was  almost  dawn  now,  a  hazy  silver  dawn.  for  a  while  we  didn't

speak.

"so," he finally said.
"right."
we shook hands. neither of us put much emotion into it and we didn't

look at each other's eyes.



jorgenson pointed out at the shot-up sandbag.
"that was a nice touch," he said. "it almost had me—" he paused and
squinted out at the eastern paddies, where the sky was beginning to color
up.  "anyway,  a  nice  dramatic  touch.  you've  got  a  real  flair  for  it.
someday maybe you should go into the movies or something."

i nodded and said, "that's an idea."
"another hitchcock. the birds—you ever see it?"
"scary stuff," i said.
we  sat  for  a  while  longer,  then  i  started  to  get  up,  except  i  was  still
feeling the wobbles in my head. jorgenson reached out and steadied me.

"we're even now?" he said.
"pretty much."
again,  i  felt  that  human  closeness.  almost  war  buddies.  we  nearly
shook hands again but then decided against it. jorgenson picked up his
helmet,  brushed  it  off,  and  looked  back  one  more  time  at  the  white
sandbag. his face was filthy.

up at the medic's hootch, he cleaned and bandaged my forehead, then
we went to chow. we didn't have much to say. i told him i was sorry; he
told me the same thing.

afterward, in an awkward moment, i said, "let's kill azar."
jorgenson smiled. "scare him to death, right?"
"right," i said.
"what a movie!"
i shrugged. "sure. or just kill him."


night life


a  few  words  about  rat  kiley.  i  wasn't  there  when  he  got  hurt,  but
mitchell sanders later told me the essential facts. apparently he lost his
cool.

the  platoon  had  been  working  an  ao  out  in  the  foothills  west  of
quang  ngai  city,  and  for  some  time  they'd  been  receiving  intelligence
about  an  nva  buildup  in  the  area.  the  usual  crazy  rumors:  massed
artillery and russian tanks and whole divisions of fresh troops. no one



took  it  seriously,  including  lieutenant  cross,  but  as  a  precaution  the
platoon  moved  only  at  night,  staying  off  the  main  trails  and  observing
strict field sops. for almost two weeks, sanders said, they lived the night
life. that was the phrase everyone used: the night life. a language trick.
it  made  things  seem  tolerable.  how's  the  nam  treating  you?  one  guy
would ask, and some other guy would say, hey, one big party, just living
the night life.

it  was  a  tense  time  for  everybody,  sanders  said,  but  for  rat  kiley  it
ended up in japan. the strain was too much for him. he couldn't make
the adjustment.

during  those  two  weeks  the  basic  routine  was  simple.  they'd  sleep
away the daylight hours, or try to sleep, then at dusk they'd put on their
gear and move out single file into the dark. always a heavy cloud cover.
no  moon  and  no  stars.  it  was  the  purest  black  you  could  imagine,
sanders  said,  the  kind  of  clock-stopping  black  that  god  must've  had  in
mind when he sat down to invent blackness. it made your eyeballs ache.
you'd shake your head and blink, except you couldn't even tell you were
blinking,  the  blackness  didn't  change.  so  pretty  soon  you'd  get  jumpy.
your nerves would go. you'd start to worry about getting cut off from the
rest of the unit—alone, you'd think—and then the real panic would bang
in and you'd reach out and try to touch the guy in front of you, groping
for  his  shirt,  hoping  to  christ  he  was  still  there.  it  made  for  some  bad
dreams.  dave  jensen  popped  special  vitamins  high  in  carotene.
lieutenant  cross  popped  nodoz.  henry  dobbins  and  norman  bowker
even rigged up a safety line between them, a long piece of string tied to
their belts. the whole platoon felt the impact.

with rat kiley, though, it was different. too many body bags, maybe.

too much gore.

at first rat just sank inside himself, not saying a word, but then later
on,  after  five  or  six  days,  it  flipped  the  other  way.  he  couldn't  stop
talking. weird talk, too. talking about bugs, for instance: how the worst
thing  in  nam  was  the  goddamn  bugs.  big  giant  killer  bugs,  he'd  say,
mutant  bugs,  bugs  with  fucked-up  dna,  bugs  that  were  chemically
altered by napalm and defoliants and tear gas and ddt. he claimed the
bugs  were  personally  after  his  ass.  he  said  he  could  hear  the  bastards
homing in on him.



swarms  of  mutant  bugs,  billions  of  them,  they  had  him  bracketed.
whispering  his  name,  he  said—his  actual  name—all  night  long—it  was
driving him crazy.

odd  stuff,  sanders  said,  and  it  wasn't  just  talk.  rat  developed  some
peculiar habits. constantly scratching himself. clawing at the bug bites.
he couldn't quit digging at his skin, making big scabs and then ripping
off the scabs and scratching the open sores.

it was a sad thing to watch. definitely not the old rat kiley. his whole

personality seemed out of kilter.

to an extent, though, everybody was feeling it. the long night marches
turned their minds upside down; all the rhythms were wrong. always a
lost  sensation.  they'd  blunder  along  through  the  dark,  willy-nilly,  no
sense of place or direction, probing for an enemy that nobody could see.
like a snipe hunt, sanders said. a bunch of dumb cub scouts chasing the
phantoms.  they'd  march  north  for  a  time,  then  east,  then  north  again,
skirting the villages, no one talking except in whispers. and it was rugged
country, too. not quite mountains, but rising fast, full of gorges and deep
brush and places you could die. around midnight things always got wild.
all  around  you,  everywhere,  the  whole  dark  countryside  came  alive.
you'd  hear  a  strange  hum  in  your  ears.  nothing  specific;  nothing  you
could put a name on. tree frogs, maybe, or snakes or flying squirrels or
who-knew-what.  like  the  night  had  its  own  voice—that  hum  in  your
ears—and  in  the  hours  after  midnight  you'd  swear  you  were  walking
through some kind of soft black protoplasm, vietnam, the blood and the
flesh.

it  was  no  joke,  sanders  said.  the  monkeys  chattered  death-chatter.

the nights got freaky.

rat kiley finally hit a wall.
he couldn't sleep during the hot daylight hours; he couldn't cope with

the nights.

late  one  afternoon,  as  the  platoon  prepared  for  another  march,  he
broke down in front of mitchell sanders. not crying, but up against it. he
said he was scared. and it wasn't normal scared. he didn't know what it
was:  too  long  in-country,  probably.  or  else  he  wasn't  cut  out  to  be  a
medic. always policing up the parts, he said. always plugging up holes.
sometimes he'd stare at guys who were still okay, the alive guys, and he'd
start to picture how they'd look dead. without arms or legs—that sort of
thing. it was ghoulish, he knew that, but he couldn't shut off the pictures.



he'd be sitting there talking with bowker or dobbins or somebody, just
marking time, and then out of nowhere he'd find himself wondering how
much the guy's head weighed, like how heavy it was, and what it would
feel like to pick up the head and carry it over to a chopper and dump it
in.

rat scratched the skin at his elbow, digging in hard. his eyes were red

and weary.

"it's not right," he said. "these pictures in my head, they won't quit. i'll
see  a  guy's  liver.  the  actual  fucking  liver.  and  the  thing  is,  it  doesn't
scare me, it doesn't even give me the willies. more like curiosity. the way
a doctor feels when he looks at a patient, sort of mechanical, not seeing
the real person, just a ruptured appendix or a clogged-up artery."

his voice floated away for a second. he looked at sanders and tried to

smile.

he kept clawing at his elbow.
"anyway," rat said, "the days aren't so bad, but at night the pictures
get to be a bitch. i start seeing my own body. chunks of myself. my own
heart, my own kidneys. it's like—i don't know—it's like staring into this
huge black crystal ball. one of these nights i'll be lying dead out there in
the  dark  and  nobody'll  find  me  except  the  bugs—i can see it—i can see
the  goddamn  bugs  chewing  tunnels  through  me—i  can  see  the
mongooses munching on my bones. i swear, it's too much. i can't keep
seeing myself dead."

mitchell sanders nodded. he didn't know what to say. for a time they

sat watching the shadows come, then rat shook his head.

he said he'd done his best. he'd tried to be a decent medic. win some
and lose some, he said, but he'd tried hard. briefly then, rambling a little,
he talked about a few of the guys who were gone now, curt lemon and
kiowa and ted lavender, and how crazy it was that people who were so
incredibly alive could get so incredibly dead.

then he almost laughed.
"this whole war," he said. "you know what it is? just one big banquet.

meat, man. you and me. everybody. meat for the bugs."

the next morning he shot himself.
he took off his boots and socks, laid out his medical kit, doped himself

up, and put a round through his foot.
nobody blamed him, sanders said.



before  the  chopper  came,  there  was  time  for  goodbyes.  lieutenant
cross  went  over  and  said  he'd  vouch  that  it  was  an  accident.  henry
dobbins and azar gave him a stack of comic books for hospital reading.
everybody stood in a little circle, feeling bad about it, trying to cheer him
up with bullshit about the great night life in japan.

the lives of the dead


but this too is true: stories can save us. i'm forty-three years old, and a
writer now, and even still, right here, i keep dreaming linda alive. and
ted lavender, too, and kiowa, and curt lemon, and a slim young man i
killed,  and  an  old  man  sprawled  beside  a  pigpen,  and  several  others
whose bodies i once lifted and dumped into a truck. they're all dead. but
in a story, which is a kind of dreaming, the dead sometimes smile and sit
up and return to the world.

start  here:  a  body  without  a  name.  on  an  afternoon  in  1969  the
platoon took sniper fire from a filthy little village along the south china
sea.  it  lasted  only  a  minute  or  two,  and  nobody  was  hurt,  but  even  so
lieutenant  jimmy  cross  got  on  the  radio  and  ordered  up  an  air  strike.
for  the  next  half  hour  we  watched  the  place  burn.  it  was  a  cool  bright
morning,  like  early  autumn,  and  the  jets  were  glossy  black  against  the
sky. when it ended, we formed into a loose line and swept east through
the  village.  it  was  all  wreckage.  i  remember  the  smell  of  burnt  straw;  i
remember broken fences and torn-up trees and heaps of stone and brick
and  pottery.  the  place  was  deserted—no  people,  no  animals—and  the
only confirmed kill was an old man who lay face-up near a pigpen at the
center  of  the  village.  his  right  arm  was  gone.  at  his  face  there  were
already many flies and gnats.

dave  jensen  went  over  and  shook  the  old  man's  hand.  "how-dee-

doo," he said.

one by one the others did it too. they didn't disturb the body, they just

grabbed the old man's hand and offered a few words and moved away.

rat kiley bent over the corpse. "gimme five," he said. "a real honor."
"pleased as punch," said henry dobbins.
i  was  brand-new  to  the  war.  it  was  my  fourth  day;  i  hadn't  yet
developed a sense of humor. right away, as if i'd swallowed something, i



felt a moist sickness rise up in my throat. i sat down beside the pigpen,
closed my eyes, put my head between my knees.

after a moment dave jensen touched my shoulder.
"be polite now," he said. "go introduce yourself. nothing to be afraid

about, just a nice old man. show a little respect for your elders."

"no way."
"maybe it's too real for you?"
"that's right," i said. "way too real."
jensen kept after me, but i didn't go near the body. i didn't even look
at  it  except  by  accident.  for  the  rest  of  the  day  there  was  still  that
sickness  inside  me,  but  it  wasn't  the  old  man's  corpse  so  much,  it  was
that awesome act of greeting the dead. at one point, i remember, they sat
the  body  up  against  a  fence.  they  crossed  his  legs  and  talked  to  him.
"the  guest  of  honor,"  mitchell  sanders  said,  and  he  placed  a  can  of
orange slices in the old man's lap. "vitamin c," he said gently. "a guy's
health, that's the most important thing."

they proposed toasts. they lifted their canteens and drank to the old
man's  family  and  ancestors,  his  many  grandchildren,  his  newfound  life
after death. it was more than mockery. there was a formality to it, like a
funeral without the sadness.

dave jensen flicked his eyes at me.
"hey,  o'brien,"  he  said,  "you  got  a  toast  in  mind?  never  too  late  for

manners."

i  found  things  to  do  with  my  hands.  i  looked  away  and  tried  not  to

think.

late in the afternoon, just before dusk, kiowa came up and asked if he
could sit at my foxhole for a minute. he offered me a christmas cookie
from  a  batch  his  father  had  sent  him.  it  was  february  now,  but  the
cookies tasted fine.

for a few moments kiowa watched the sky.
"you  did  a  good  thing  today,"  he  said.  "that  shaking  hands  crap,  it
isn't  decent.  the  guys'll  hassle  you  for  a  while—especially  jensen—but
just keep saying no. should've done it myself. takes guts, i know that."

"it wasn't guts. i was scared."
kiowa shrugged. "same difference."



"no,  i  couldn't do  it.  a  mental  block  or  something  .  .  .  i  don't  know,

just creepy."

"well, you're new here. you'll get used to it." he paused for a second,
studying  the  green  and  red  sprinkles  on  a  cookie.  "today—i  guess  this
was your first look at a real body?"

i shook my head. all day long i'd been picturing linda's face, the way

she smiled.

"it sounds funny," i said, "but that poor old man, he reminds me of... i
mean, there's this girl i used to know. i took her to the movies once. my
first date."

kiowa looked at me for a long while. then he leaned back and smiled.
"man," he said, "that's a bad date."



linda  was  nine  then,  as  i  was,  but  we  were  in  love.  and  it  was  real.
when i write about her now, three decades later, it's tempting to dismiss
it as a crush, an infatuation of childhood, but i know for a fact that what
we felt for each other was as deep and rich as love can ever get. it had all
the  shadings  and  complexities  of  mature  adult  love,  and  maybe  more,
because there were not yet words for it, and because it was not yet fixed
to  comparisons  or  chronologies  or  the  ways  by  which  adults  measure
such things.

i just loved her.
she  had  poise  and  great  dignity.  her  eyes,  i  remember,  were  deep
brown  like  her  hair,  and  she  was  slender  and  very  quiet  and  fragile-
looking.

even then, at nine years old, i wanted to live inside her body. i wanted

to melt into her bones—that kind of love.

and so in the spring of 1956, when we were in the fourth grade, i took
her out on the first real date of my life—a double date, actually, with my
mother  and  father.  though  i  can't  remember  the  exact  sequence,  my
mother had somehow arranged it with linda's parents, and on that damp
spring night my dad did the driving while linda and i sat in the back seat
and  stared  out  opposite  windows,  both  of  us  trying  to  pretend  it  was
nothing special. for me, though, it was very special. down inside i had
important things to tell her, big profound things, but i couldn't make any
words come out. i had trouble breathing. now and then i'd glance over at
her,  thinking  how  beautiful  she  was:  her  white  skin  and  those  dark



brown  eyes  and  the  way  she  always  smiled  at  the  world—always,  it
seemed—as if her face had been designed that way. the smile never went
away. that night, i remember, she wore a new red cap, which seemed to
me  very  stylish  and  sophisticated,  very  unusual.  it  was  a  stocking  cap,
basically,  except  the  tapered  part  at  the  top  seemed  extra  long,  almost
too long, like a tail growing out of the back of her head. it made me think
of the caps that santa's elves wear, the same shape and color, the same
fuzzy white tassel at the tip.

sitting  there  in  the  back  seat,  i  wanted  to  find  some  way  to  let  her
know how i felt, a compliment of some sort, but all i could manage was a
stupid comment about the cap. "jeez," i must've said, "what a cap."

linda smiled at the window—she knew what i meant—but my mother
turned and gave me a hard look. it surprised me. it was as if i'd brought
up some horrible secret.

for the rest of the ride i kept my mouth shut. we parked in front of
the  ben  franklin  store  and  walked  up  main  street  toward  the  state
theater. my parents went first, side by side, and then linda in her new
red cap, and then me tailing along ten or twenty steps behind. i was nine
years  old;  i  didn't  yet  have  the  gift  for  small  talk.  now  and  then  my
mother glanced back, making little motions with her hand to speed me
up.

at the ticket booth, i remember, linda stood off to one side. i moved
over to the concession area, studying the candy, and both of us were very
careful  to  avoid  the  awkwardness  of  eye  contact.  which  was  how  we
knew about being in love. it was pure knowing. neither of us, i suppose,
would've thought to use that word, love, but by the fact of not looking at
each  other,  and  not  talking,  we  understood  with  a  clarity  beyond
language that we were sharing something huge and permanent.

behind me, in the theater, i heard cartoon music.
"hey, step it up," i said. i almost had the courage to look at her. "you

want popcorn or what?"


the thing about a story is that you dream it as you tell it, hoping that
others  might  then  dream  along  with  you,  and  in  this  way  memory  and
imagination and language combine to make spirits in the head. there is
the  illusion  of  aliveness.  in  vietnam,  for  instance,  ted  lavender  had  a
habit of popping four or five tranquilizers every morning. it was his way



of  coping,  just  dealing  with  the  realities,  and  the  drugs  helped  to  ease
him through the days. i remember how peaceful his eyes were. even in
bad  situations  he  had  a  soft,  dreamy  expression  on  his  face,  which  was
what  he  wanted,  a  kind  of  escape.  "how's  the  war  today?"  somebody
would ask, and ted lavender would give a little smile to the sky and say,
"mellow—a nice smooth war today." and then in april he was shot in the
head outside the village of than khe. kiowa and i and a couple of others
were ordered to prepare his body for the dustoff. i remember squatting
down,  not  wanting  to  look  but  then  looking.  lavender's  left  cheekbone
was gone. there was a swollen blackness around his eye. quickly, trying
not  to  feel  anything,  we  went  through  the  kid's  pockets.  i  remember
wishing i had gloves. it wasn't the blood i hated; it was the deadness. we
put his personal effects in a plastic bag and tied the bag to his arm. we
stripped  off  the  canteens  and  ammo,  all  the  heavy  stuff,  and  wrapped
him up in his own poncho and carried him out to a dry paddy and laid
him down.

for  a  while  nobody  said  much.  then  mitchell  sanders  laughed  and

looked over at the green plastic poncho.

"hey, lavender," he said, "how's the war today?"
there was a short quiet.
"mellow," somebody said.
"well,  that's  good,"  sanders  murmured,  "that's  real,  real  good.  stay

cool now."

"hey, no sweat, i'm mellow."
"just  ease  on  back,  then.  don't  need  no  pills.  we  got  this  incredible

chopper on call, this once in a lifetime mind-trip."

"oh, yeah—mellow!"
mitchell sanders smiled. "there it is, my man, this chopper gonna take
you  up  high  and  cool.  gonna  relax  you.  gonna  alter  your  whole
perspective on this sorry, sorry shit."

we  could  almost  see  ted  lavender's  dreamy  blue  eyes.  we  could

almost hear him.

"roger that," somebody said. "i'm ready to fly."
there  was  the  sound  of  the  wind,  the  sound  of  birds  and  the  quiet

afternoon, which was the world we were in.



that's what a story does. the bodies are animated. you make the dead
talk. they sometimes say things like, "roger that." or they say, "timmy,
stop crying," which is what linda said to me after she was dead.


even now i can see her walking down the aisle of the old state theater
in worthington, minnesota. i can see her face in profile beside me, the
cheeks softly lighted by coming attractions.

the movie that night was the man who never was. i remember the
plot  clearly,  or  at  least  the  premise,  because  the  main  character  was  a
corpse.  that  fact  alone,  i  know,  deeply  impressed  me.  it  was  a  world
war two film: the allies devise a scheme to mislead germany about the
site  of  the  upcoming  landings  in  europe.  they  get  their  hands  on  a
body—a  british  soldier,  i  believe;  they  dress  him  up  in  an  officer's
uniform, plant fake documents in his pockets, then dump him in the sea
and let the currents wash him onto a nazi beach. the germans find the
documents; the deception wins the war. even now, i can remember the
awful splash as that corpse fell into the sea. i remember glancing over at
linda,  thinking  it  might  be  too  much  for  her,  but  in  the  dim  gray  light
she seemed to be smiling at the screen. there were little crinkles at her
eyes,  her  lips  open  and  gently  curving  at  the  corners.  i  couldn't
understand it. there was nothing to smile at. once or twice, in fact, i had
to  close  my  eyes,  but  it  didn't  help  much.  even  then  i  kept  seeing  the
soldier's  body  tumbling  toward  the  water,  splashing  down  hard,  how
inert and heavy it was, how completely dead.

it was a relief when the movie finally ended.
afterward, we drove out to the dairy queen at the edge of town. the
night  had  a  quilted,  weighted-down  quality,  as  if  somehow  burdened,
and all around us the minnesota prairies reached out in long repetitive
waves  of  corn  and  soybeans,  everything  flat,  everything  the  same.  i
remember  eating  ice  cream  in  the  back  seat  of  the  buick,  and  a  long
blank  drive  in  the  dark,  and  then  pulling  up  in  front  of  linda's  house.
things  must've  been  said,  but  it's  all  gone  now  except  for  a  few  last
images. i remember walking her to the front door. i remember the brass
porch light with its fierce yellow glow, my own feet, the juniper bushes
along the front steps, the wet grass, linda close beside me. we were in
love. nine years old, yes, but it was real love, and now we were alone on
those front steps. finally we looked at each other.

"bye," i said.



linda nodded and said, "bye."



over the next few weeks linda wore her new red cap to school every
day.  she  never  took  it  off,  not  even  in  the  classroom,  and  so  it  was
inevitable that she took some teasing about it. most of it came from a kid
named nick veenhof. out on the playground, during recess, nick would
creep up behind her and make a grab for the cap, almost yanking it off,
then scampering away. it went on like that for weeks: the girls giggling,
the guys egging him on. naturally i wanted to do something about it, but
it  just  wasn't  possible.  i  had  my  reputation  to  think  about.  i  had  my
pride. and there was also the problem of nick veenhof. so i stood off to
the  side,  just  a  spectator,  wishing  i  could  do  things  i  couldn't  do.  i
watched linda clamp down the cap with the palm of her hand, holding it
there, smiling over in nick's direction as if none of it really mattered.

for  me,  though,  it  did  matter.  it  still  does.  i  should've  stepped  in;
fourth  grade  is  no  excuse.  besides,  it  doesn't  get  easier  with  time,  and
twelve years later, when vietnam presented much harder choices, some
practice at being brave might've helped a little.

also, too, i might've stopped what happened next. maybe not, but at

least it's possible.

most of the details i've forgotten, or maybe blocked out, but i know it
was an afternoon in late spring, and we were taking a spelling test, and
halfway into it nick veenhof held up his hand and asked to use the pencil
sharpener. right away the kids laughed. no doubt he'd broken the pencil
on purpose, but it wasn't something you could prove, and so the teacher
nodded  and  told  him  to  hustle  it  up.  which  was  a  mistake.  out  of
nowhere  nick  developed  a  terrible  limp.  he  moved  in  slow  motion,
dragging himself up to the pencil sharpener and carefully slipping in his
pencil  and  then  grinding  away  forever.  at  the  time,  i  suppose,  it  was
funny.  but  on  the  way  back  to  his  seat  nick  took  a  short  detour.  he
squeezed  between  two  desks,  turned  sharply  right,  and  moved  up  the
aisle toward linda.

i saw him grin at one of his pals. in a way, i already knew what was

coming.

as he passed linda's desk, he dropped the pencil and squatted down
to get it. when he came up, his left hand slipped behind her back. there
was  a  half-second  hesitation.  maybe  he  was  trying  to  stop  himself;
maybe then, just briefly, he felt some small approximation of guilt. but it



wasn't  enough.  he  took  hold  of  the  white  tassel,  stood  up,  and  gently
lifted off her cap.

somebody  must've  laughed.  i  remember  a  short,  tinny  echo.  i
remember  nick  veenhof  trying  to  smile.  somewhere  behind  me,  a  girl
said, "uh," or a sound like that.

linda didn't move.
even now, when i think back on it, i can still see the glossy whiteness
of  her  scalp.  she  wasn't  bald.  not  quite.  not  completely.  there  were
some  tufts  of  hair,  little  patches  of  grayish  brown  fuzz.  but  what  i  saw
then,  and  keep  seeing  now,  is  all  that  whiteness.  a  smooth,  pale,
translucent white. i could see the bones and veins; i could see the exact
structure  of  her  skull.  there  was  a  large  band-aid  at  the  back  of  her
head, a row of black stitches, a piece of gauze taped above her left ear.

nick veenhof took a step backward. he was still smiling, but the smile

was doing strange things.

the  whole  time  linda  stared  straight  ahead,  her  eyes  locked  on  the
blackboard, her hands loosely folded at her lap. she didn't say anything.
after  a  time,  though,  she  turned  and  looked  at  me  across  the  room.  it
lasted  only  a  moment,  but  i  had  the  feeling  that  a  whole  conversation
was happening between us. well? she was saying, and i was saying, sure,
okay.

later on, she cried for a while. the teacher helped her put the cap back
on,  then  we  finished  the  spelling  test  and  did  some  fingerpainting,  and
after school that day nick veenhof and i walked her home.


it's  now  1990.  i'm  forty-three  years  old,  which  would've  seemed
impossible  to  a  fourth  grader,  and  yet  when  i  look  at  photographs  of
myself  as  i  was  in  1956,  i  realize  that  in  the  important  ways  i  haven't
changed at all. i was timmy then; now i'm tim. but the essence remains
the same. i'm not fooled by the baggy pants or the crew cut or the happy
smile—i  know  my  own  eyes—and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  timmy
smiling at the camera is the tim i am now. inside the body, or beyond
the body, there is something absolute and unchanging. the human life is
all one thing, like a blade tracing loops on ice: a little kid, a twenty-three-
year-old  infantry  sergeant,  a  middle-aged  writer  knowing  guilt  and
sorrow.

and as a writer now, i want to save linda's life. not her body—her life.



she died, of course. nine years old and she died. it was a brain tumor.
she lived through the summer and into the first part of september, and
then she was dead.

but  in  a  story  i  can  steal  her  soul.  i  can  revive,  at  least  briefly,  that
which  is  absolute  and  unchanging.  in  a  story,  miracles  can  happen.
linda can smile and sit up. she can reach out, touch my wrist, and say,
"timmy, stop crying."

i needed that kind of miracle. at some point i had come to understand
that linda was sick, maybe even dying, but i loved her and just couldn't
accept it. in the middle of the summer, i remember, my mother tried to
explain  to  me  about  brain  tumors.  now  and  then,  she  said,  bad  things
start growing inside us. sometimes you can cut them out and other times
you can't, and for linda it was one of the times when you can't.

i  thought  about  it  for  several  days.  "all  right,"  i  finally  said.  "so  will

she get better now?"

"well,  no,"  my  mother  said,  "i  don't  think  so."  she  stared  at  a  spot
behind my shoulder. "sometimes people don't ever get better. they die
sometimes."

i shook my head.
"not linda," i said.
but  on  a  september  afternoon,  during  noon  recess,  nick  veenhof
came up to me on the school playground. "your girlfriend," he said, "she
kicked the bucket."

at first i didn't understand.
"she's  dead,"  he  said.  "my  mom  told  me  at  lunch-time.  no  lie,  she

actually kicked the goddang bucket."

all  i  could  do  was  nod.  somehow  it  didn't  quite  register.  i  turned
away,  glanced  down  at  my  hands  for  a  second,  then  walked  home
without telling anyone.

it was a little after one o'clock, i remember, and the house was empty.
i  drank  some  chocolate  milk  and  then  lay  down  on  the  sofa  in  the
living room, not really sad, just floating, trying to imagine what it was to
be  dead.  nothing  much  came  to  me.  i  remember  closing  my  eyes  and
whispering  her  name,  almost  begging,  trying  to  make  her  come  back.
"linda,"  i  said,  "please."  and  then  i  concentrated.  i  willed  her  alive.  it
was a dream, i suppose, or a daydream, but i made it happen. i saw her
coming down the middle of main street, all alone. it was nearly dark and



the street was deserted, no cars or people, and linda wore a pink dress
and shiny black shoes. i remember sitting down on the curb to watch. all
her hair had grown back. the scars and stitches were gone. in the dream,
if that's what it was, she was playing a game of some sort, laughing and
running up the empty street, kicking a big aluminum water bucket.

right then i started to cry. after a moment linda stopped and carried

her water bucket over to the curb and asked why i was so sad.

"well, god," i said, "you're dead."
linda  nodded  at  me.  she  was  standing  under  a  yellow  streetlight.  a
nine-year-old girl, just a kid, and yet there was something ageless in her
eyes—not a child, not an adult—just a bright ongoing everness, that same
pinprick  of  absolute  lasting  light  that  i  see  today  in  my  own  eyes  as
timmy smiles at tim from the graying photographs of that time.

"dead," i said.
linda smiled. it was a secret smile, as if she knew things nobody could
ever know, and she reached out and touched my wrist and said, "timmy,
stop crying. it doesn't matter."


in  vietnam,  too,  we  had  ways  of  making  the  dead  seem  not  quite  so
dead. shaking hands, that was one way. by slighting death, by acting, we
pretended it was not the terrible thing it was. by our language, which was
both  hard  and  wistful,  we  transformed  the  bodies  into  piles  of  waste.
thus,  when  someone  got  killed,  as  curt  lemon  did,  his  body  was  not
really  a  body,  but  rather  one  small  bit  of  waste  in  the  midst  of  a  much
wider wastage. i learned that words make a difference. it's easier to cope
with  a  kicked  bucket  than  a  corpse;  if  it  isn't  human,  it  doesn't  matter
much  if  it's  dead.  and  so  a  vc  nurse,  fried  by  napalm,  was  a  crispy
critter. a vietnamese baby, which lay nearby, was a roasted peanut. "just
a crunchie munchie," rat kiley said as he stepped over the body.

we kept the dead alive with stories. when ted lavender was shot in
the  head,  the  men  talked  about  how  they'd  never  seen  him  so  mellow,
how  tranquil  he  was,  how  it  wasn't  the  bullet  but  the  tranquilizers  that
blew  his  mind.  he  wasn't  dead,  just  laid-back.  there  were  christians
among us, like kiowa, who believed in the new testament stories of life
after death. other stories were passed down like legends from old-timer
to  newcomer.  mostly,  though,  we  had  to  make  up  our  own.  often  they
were exaggerated, or blatant lies, but it was a way of bringing body and



soul  back  together,  or  a  way  of  making  new  bodies  for  the  souls  to
inhabit. there was a story, for instance, about how curt lemon had gone
trick-or-treating on halloween. a dark, spooky night, and so lemon put
on  a  ghost  mask  and  painted  up  his  body  all  different  colors  and  crept
across a paddy to a sleeping village—almost stark naked, the story went,
just  boots  and  balls  and  an  m-16—and  in  the  dark  lemon  went  from
hootch to hootch—ringing doorbells, he called it—and a few hours later,
when  he  slipped  back  into  the  perimeter,  he  had  a  whole  sackful  of
goodies to share with his pals: candles and joss sticks and a pair of black
pajamas  and  statuettes  of  the  smiling  buddha.  that  was  the  story,
anyway.  other  versions  were  much  more  elaborate,  full  of  descriptions
and  scraps  of  dialogue.  rat  kiley  liked  to  spice  it  up  with  extra  details:
"see,  what  happens  is,  it's  like  four  in  the  morning,  and  lemon  sneaks
into a hootch with that weird ghost mask on. everybody's asleep, right?
so he wakes up this cute little mama-san. tickles her foot. 'hey, mama-
san,'  he  goes,  real  soft  like.  'hey,  mama-san—trick  or  treat!'  should've
seen  her  face.  about  freaks.  i  mean,  there's  this  buck  naked  ghost
standing  there,  and  he's  got  this  m-16  up  against  her  ear  and  he
whispers,  'hey,  mama-san,  trick  or  fuckin'  treat!'  then  he  takes  off  her
pj's. strips her right down. sticks the pajamas in his sack and tucks her
into bed and heads for the next hootch."

pausing a moment, rat kiley would grin and shake his head. "honest

to god," he'd murmur. "trick or treat. lemon—there's one class act."

to listen to the story, especially as rat kiley told it, you'd never know
that curt lemon was dead. he was still out there in the dark, naked and
painted up, trick-or-treating, sliding from hootch to hootch in that crazy
white ghost mask. but he was dead.


in september, the day after linda died, i asked my father to take me
down  to  benson's  funeral  home  to  view  the  body.  i  was  a  fifth  grader
then;  i  was  curious.  on  the  drive  downtown  my  father  kept  his  eyes
straight ahead. at one point, i remember, he made a scratchy sound in
his throat. it took him a long time to light up a cigarette.

"timmy," he said, "you're sure about this?"
i nodded at him. down inside, of course, i wasn't sure, and yet i had to
see her one more time. what i needed, i suppose, was some sort of final
confirmation, something to carry with me after she was gone.



when  we  parked  in  front  of  the  funeral  home,  my  father  turned  and
looked  at  me.  "if  this  bothers  you,"  he  said,  "just  say  the  word.  we'll
make a quick getaway. fair enough?"

"okay," i said.
"or if you start to feel sick or anything—"
"i won't," i told him.
inside,  the  first  thing  i  noticed  was  the  smell,  thick  and  sweet,  like
something sprayed out of a can. the viewing room was empty except for
linda and my father and me. i felt a rush of panic as we walked up the
aisle.  the  smell  made  me  dizzy.  i  tried  to  fight  it  off,  slowing  down  a
little, taking short, shallow breaths through my mouth. but at the same
time  i  felt  a  funny  excitement.  anticipation,  in  a  way—that  same
awkward feeling when i walked up the sidewalk to ring her doorbell on
our  first  date.  i  wanted  to  impress  her.  i  wanted  something  to  happen
between  us,  a  secret  signal  of  some  sort.  the  room  was  dimly  lighted,
almost  dark,  but  at  the  far  end  of  the  aisle  linda's  white  casket  was
illuminated by a row of spotlights up in the ceiling. everything was quiet.
my  father  put  his  hand  on  my  shoulder,  whispered  something,  and
backed off. after a moment i edged forward a few steps, pushing up on
my toes for a better look.

it  didn't  seem  real.  a  mistake,  i  thought.  the  girl  lying  in  the  white
casket wasn't linda. there was a resemblance, maybe, but where linda
had  always  been  very  slender  and  fragile-looking,  almost  skinny,  the
body  in  that  casket  was  fat  and  swollen.  for  a  second  i  wondered  if
somebody had made a terrible blunder. a technical mistake: like they'd
pumped  her  too  full  of  formaldehyde  or  embalming  fluid  or  whatever
they used. her arms and face were bloated. the skin at her cheeks was
stretched  out  tight  like  the  rubber  skin  on  a  balloon  just  before  it  pops
open.  even  her  fingers  seemed  puffy.  i  turned  and  glanced  behind  me,
where my father stood, thinking that maybe it was a joke—hoping it was
a joke—almost believing that linda would jump out from behind one of
the curtains and laugh and yell out my name.

but she didn't. the room was silent. when i looked back at the casket,
i felt dizzy again. in my heart, i'm sure, i knew this was linda, but even
so i couldn't find much to recognize. i tried to pretend she was taking a
nap, her hands folded at her stomach, just sleeping away the afternoon.
except  she  didn't  look  asleep.  she  looked  dead.  she  looked  heavy  and
totally dead.



i remember closing my eyes. after a while my father stepped up beside

me.

"come on now," he said. "let's go get some ice cream."



in the months after ted lavender died, there were many other bodies.
i  never  shook  hands—not  that—but  one  afternoon  i  climbed  a  tree  and
threw  down  what  was  left  of  curt  lemon.  i  watched  my  friend  kiowa
sink  into  the  muck  along  the  song  tra  bong.  and  in  early  july,  after  a
battle in the mountains, i was assigned to a six-man detail to police up
the enemy kias. there were twenty-seven bodies altogether, and parts of
several  others.  the  dead  were  everywhere.  some  lay  in  piles.  some  lay
alone.  one,  i  remember,  seemed  to  kneel.  another  was  bent  from  the
waist over a small boulder, the top of his head on the ground, his arms
rigid, the eyes squinting in concentration as if he were about to perform a
handstand  or  somersault.  it  was  my  worst  day  at  the  war.  for  three
hours we carried the bodies down the mountain to a clearing alongside a
narrow  dirt  road.  we  had  lunch  there,  then  a  truck  pulled  up,  and  we
worked  in  two-man  teams  to  load  the  truck.  i  remember  swinging  the
bodies  up.  mitchell  sanders  took  a  man's  feet,  i  took  the  arms,  and  we
counted to three, working up momentum, and then we tossed the body
high  and  watched  it  bounce  and  come  to  rest  among  the  other  bodies.
the  dead  had  been  dead  for  more  than  a  day.  they  were  all  badly
bloated. their clothing was stretched tight like sausage skins, and when
we picked them up, some made sharp burping sounds as the gases were
released.  they  were  heavy.  their  feet  were  bluish  green  and  cold.  the
smell was terrible. at one point mitchell sanders looked at me and said,
"hey, man, i just realized something."

"what?"
he  wiped  his  eyes  and  spoke  very  quietly,  as  if  awed  by  his  own

wisdom.

"death sucks," he said.



lying in bed at night, i made up elaborate stories to bring linda alive
in  my  sleep.  i  invented  my  own  dreams.  it  sounds  impossible,  i  know,
but i did it. i'd picture somebody's birthday party—a crowded room, i'd
think, and a big chocolate cake with pink candles—and then soon i'd be
dreaming  it,  and  after  a  while  linda  would  show  up,  as  i  knew  she



would,  and  in  the  dream  we'd  look  at  each  other  and  not  talk  much,
because  we  were  shy,  but  then  later  i'd  walk  her  home  and  we'd  sit  on
her front steps and stare at the dark and just be together.

she'd  say  amazing  things  sometimes.  "once  you're  alive,"  she'd  say,

"you can't ever be dead."

or she'd say: "do i look dead?"
it was a kind of self-hypnosis. partly willpower, partly faith, which is

how stories arrive.

but  back  then  it  felt  like  a  miracle.  my  dreams  had  become  a  secret
meeting  place,  and  in  the  weeks  after  she  died  i  couldn't  wait  to  fall
asleep at night. i began going to bed earlier and earlier, sometimes even
in  bright  daylight.  my  mother,  i  remember,  finally  asked  about  it  at
breakfast one morning. "timmy, what's wrong?" she said, but all i could
do was shrug and say, "nothing. i just need sleep, that's all." i didn't dare
tell the truth. it was embarrassing, i suppose, but it was also a precious
secret, like a magic trick, where if i tried to explain it, or even talk about
it, the thrill and mystery would be gone. i didn't want to lose linda.

she was dead. i understood that. after all, i'd seen her body, and yet
even  as  a  nine-year-old  i  had  begun  to  practice  the  magic  of  stories.
some i just dreamed up. others i wrote down—the scenes and dialogue.
and at nighttime i'd slide into sleep knowing that linda would be there
waiting  for  me.  once,  i  remember,  we  went  ice  skating  late  at  night,
tracing loops and circles under yellow floodlights. later we sat by a wood
stove in the warming house, all alone, and after a while i asked her what
it was like to be dead. apparently linda thought it was a silly question.
she smiled and said, "do i look dead?"

i told her no, she looked terrific. i waited a moment, then asked again,
and linda made a soft little sigh. i could smell our wool mittens drying
on the stove.

for a few seconds she was quiet.
"well, right now," she said, "i'm not dead. but when i am, it's like ... i

don't know, i guess it's like being inside a book that nobody's reading."

"a book?" i said.
"an  old  one.  it's  up  on  a  library  shelf,  so  you're  safe  and  everything,
but the book hasn't been checked out for a long, long time. all you can do
is wait. just hope somebody'll pick it up and start reading."

linda smiled at me.



"anyhow,  it's  not  so  bad,"  she  said.  "i  mean,  when  you're  dead,  you
just have to be yourself." she stood up and put on her red stocking cap.
"this is stupid. let's go skate some more."

so i followed her down to the frozen pond. it was late, and nobody else
was  there,  and  we  held  hands  and  skated  almost  all  night  under  the
yellow lights.

and then it becomes 1990. i'm forty-three years old, and a writer now,
still  dreaming  linda  alive  in  exactly  the  same  way.  she's  not  the
embodied  linda;  she's  mostly  made  up,  with  a  new  identity  and  a  new
name,  like  the  man  who  never  was.  her  real  name  doesn't  matter.  she
was nine years old. i loved her and then she died. and yet right here, in
the spell of memory and imagination, i can still see her as if through ice,
as if i'm gazing into some other world, a place where there are no brain
tumors and no funeral homes, where there are no bodies at all. i can see
kiowa,  too,  and  ted  lavender  and  curt  lemon,  and  sometimes  i  can
even  see  timmy  skating  with  linda  under  the  yellow  floodlights.  i'm
young and happy. i'll never die. i'm skimming across the surface of my
own history, moving fast, riding the melt beneath the blades, doing loops
and  spins,  and  when  i  take  a  high  leap  into  the  dark  and  come  down
thirty years later, i realize it is as tim trying to save timmy's life with a
story.

the end




