


[CHARACTER] 
thoreau's occasional visitor, therien is the individual
in the work who comes closest to being considered a friend, although
there is always a distance between the two that reveals much about
thoreau's prejudices. the hermit and the woodsman are both contented with
a humble backwoods life; both take a pleasure in physical exertion
(therien is a woodchopper and post-driver, thoreau is a bean-cultivator);
and both are of french canadian descent, as their names indicate.
thoreau describes therien as "homeric" in chapter 6, voicing
a deep tribute to a naturally noble man who is as heroic in his
sheer vitality as odysseus or achilles, the heroes of homer's two epic
poems, despite the man's lack of formal education and social polish.
therien seems remote from social customs, as when he happily dines
on a woodchuck caught by his dog. nevertheless, he strikes people
as inwardly aristocratic ("a prince in disguise," according to one
townsman). he is sensitive to great art, as when thoreau reads a
passage from homer's iliad to him, and therien responds
with the simple and resounding praise, "that's good." he may not
fully grasp what he has heard, but he can appreciate the beauty
of it nonetheless. he shows a powerful moral sense, as when he spends
his sunday morning gathering white oak bark for a sick man, not
complaining about the task. therien is an astonishing worker to
an almost mythical degree, capable of driving fifty posts in a day,
and claiming that he has never been tired in his life. yet he is
also artistic in his labor, and can think of nothing more pleasurable
than tree chopping.
in all these qualities, therien seems thoreau's ideal
man. therien does not "play any part" or perform any fake social
role, but is always only himself, as true to himself as thoreau
elsewhere says he aims to be. therien is absolutely "genuine and
unsophisticated," and is "simply and naturally humble." thoreau
is not sure whether therien is as wise as shakespeare or as ignorant
as a child, thus indirectly acknowledging that the man is both,
displaying a kind of wise ignorance. thoreau suspects that therien
is a man of genius, as profound as walden pond, despite his muddy
surface. we feel how closely identified therien is with thoreau's
own self-image: a wisely ignorant, hard-working, independent genius
of the backwoods.
strikingly, thoreau never describes therien as his friend,
but always merely as a man who visits him, leaving a gulf between
the two men. this unbridgeable divide is basically rooted in their
differing levels of education. therien is not a reader, and is "so
deeply immersed in his animal life" that he can never carry on the
kind of higher conversation thoreau values. thoreau mentions this
flaw in therien at the end of the passage describing him, and it
feels like a kind of mild damnation, since therien never appears
again in walden. the label "animal" also feels
a bit unfair, as we may wonder what exactly separates thoreau from
the animal-like therien and other beasts. a taste for reading alone
surely does not make all the difference. it may be that thoreau
simply cannot imagine any rival for his role as natural genius,
and must downgrade therien before dismissing him. the relationship
with therien may make us wonder whether thoreau's individualism
is--at least sometimes--a bit ungenerous, self-centered, and proud.
