


[CHARACTER]
[CHARACTER] proves the most dynamic character
in a tale of two cities. he first appears as a
lazy, alcoholic attorney who cannot muster even the smallest amount
of interest in his own life. he describes his existence as a supreme
waste of life and takes every opportunity to declare that he cares
for nothing and no one. but the reader senses, even in the initial
chapters of the novel, that carton in fact feels something that
he perhaps cannot articulate. in his conversation with the recently
acquitted charles darnay, carton's comments about lucie manette,
while bitter and sardonic, betray his interest in, and budding feelings for,
the gentle girl. eventually, carton reaches a point where he can
admit his feelings to lucie herself. before lucie weds darnay, carton
professes his love to her, though he still persists in seeing himself
as essentially worthless. this scene marks a vital transition for
carton and lays the foundation for the supreme sacrifice that he
makes at the novel's end.

carton's death has provided much material for
scholars and critics of dickens's novel. some readers consider it
the inevitable conclusion to a work obsessed with the themes of
redemption and resurrection. according to this interpretation, carton becomes
a christ-like figure, a selfless martyr whose death enables the
happiness of his beloved and ensures his own immortality. other
readers, however, question the ultimate significance of carton's
final act. they argue that since carton initially places little
value on his existence, the sacrifice of his life proves relatively
easy. however, dickens's frequent use in his text of other resurrection
imagery--his motifs of wine and blood, for example--suggests that
he did intend for carton's death to be redemptive, whether or not
it ultimately appears so to the reader. as carton goes to the guillotine,
the narrator tells us that he envisions a beautiful, idyllic paris
"rising from the abyss" and sees "the evil of this time and of the
previous time of which this is the natural birth, gradually making
expiation for itself and wearing out." just as the apocalyptic violence
of the revolution precedes a new society's birth, perhaps it is
only in the sacrifice of his life that carton can establish his
life's great worth.
