


mr.[CHARACTER]
although utterson witnesses a string of shocking events,
utterson himself is a largely unexciting character and is clearly
not a man of strong passions or sensibilities. indeed, stevenson
intends for him to come across in this way: from the first page
of the novel, the text notes that utterson has a face that is "never
lighted by a smile," that he speaks very little, and that he seems
"lean, long, dusty, [and] dreary." yet, somehow, he is also "lovable,"
and dull and proper though he may be, he has many friends. his lovability
may stem from the only interesting quality that stevenson gives
him--namely, his willingness to remain friends with someone whose
reputation has suffered. this loyalty leads him to plumb the mystery
that surrounds jekyll.
utterson represents the perfect victorian gentleman. he
consistently seeks to preserve order and decorum, does not gossip,
and guards his friends' reputations as though they were his own.
even when he suspects his friend jekyll of criminal activities such
as blackmail or the sheltering of a murderer, he prefers to sweep
what he has learned--or what he thinks he has learned--under the rug rather
than bring ruin upon his good friend.

utterson's status as the epitome of victorian norms also
stems from his devotion to reason and common sense. he investigates what
becomes a supernatural sequence of events but never allows himself
to even entertain the notion that something uncanny may be going
on. he considers that misdeeds may be occurring but not that the
mystical or metaphysical might be afoot. thus, even at the end, when
he is summoned by poole to jekyll's home and all the servants are
gathered frightened in the hallway, utterson continues to look for
an explanation that preserves reason. he desperately searches for
excuses not to take any drastic steps to interfere with jekyll's
life. in utterson's devotion to both decorum and reason, stevenson depicts
victorian society's general attempt to maintain the authority of
civilization over and against humanity's darker side. stevenson suggests
that just as utterson prefers the suppression or avoidance of revelations
to the scandal or chaos that the truth might unleash, so too does
victorian society prefer to repress and deny the existence of an
uncivilized or savage element of humanity, no matter how intrinsic
that element may be.
yet, even as utterson adheres rigidly to order and rationality,
he does not fail to notice the uncanny quality of the events he
investigates. indeed, because we see the novel through utterson's
eyes, stevenson cannot allow utterson to be too unimaginative--otherwise
the novel's eerie mood would suffer. correspondingly, stevenson
attributes nightmares to utterson and grants him ominous premonitions
as he moves through the city at night--neither of which seem to suit
the lawyer's normally reasonable personality, which is rarely given
to flights of fancy. perhaps, the novel suggests, the chilling presence
of hyde in london is strong enough to penetrate even the rigidly
rational shell that surrounds utterson, planting a seed of supernatural
dread.
