


[CHARACTER] 
[CHARACTER] is the protagonist and tragic hero of marlowe's
play. he is a contradictory character, capable of tremendous eloquence
and possessing awesome ambition, yet prone to a strange, almost
willful blindness and a willingness to waste powers that
he has gained at great cost. when we first meet [CHARACTER], he is just
preparing to embark on his career as a magician, and while we already
anticipate that things will turn out badly (the chorus's introduction,
if nothing else, prepares us), there is nonetheless a grandeur to
[CHARACTER] as he contemplates all the marvels that his magical powers
will produce. he imagines piling up wealth from the four corners
of the globe, reshaping the map of europe (both politically and
physically), and gaining access to every scrap of knowledge about
the universe. he is an arrogant, self-aggrandizing man, but his
ambitions are so grand that we cannot help being impressed, and
we even feel sympathetic toward him. he represents the spirit of
the renaissance, with its rejection of the medieval, god-centered
universe, and its embrace of human possibility. [CHARACTER], at least early
on in his acquisition of magic, is the personification of possibility.

	but [CHARACTER] also possesses an obtuseness that becomes
apparent during his bargaining sessions with mephastophilis. having decided
that a pact with the devil is the only way to fulfill his ambitions,
[CHARACTER] then blinds himself happily to what such a pact actually
means. sometimes he tells himself that hell is not so bad and that one
needs only "fortitude"; at other times, even while conversing with
mephastophilis, he remarks to the disbelieving demon that he does
not actually believe hell exists. meanwhile, despite his lack of concern
about the prospect of eternal damnation, -[CHARACTER] is also beset
with doubts from the beginning, setting a pattern for the play in
which he repeatedly approaches repentance only to pull back at the
last moment. why he fails to repent is unclear: -sometimes it seems
a matter of pride and continuing ambition, sometimes a conviction
that god will not hear his plea. other times, it seems that mephastophilis
simply bullies him away from repenting.
bullying [CHARACTER] is less difficult than it might seem,
because marlowe, after setting his protagonist up as a grandly tragic
figure of sweeping visions and immense ambitions, spends the middle
scenes revealing [CHARACTER]'s true, petty nature. once [CHARACTER] gains
his long-desired powers, he does not know what to do with them.
marlowe suggests that this uncertainty stems, in part, from the
fact that desire for knowledge leads inexorably toward god, whom
[CHARACTER] has renounced. but, more generally, absolute power corrupts
[CHARACTER]: once he can do everything, he no longer wants to do anything. instead,
he traipses around europe, playing tricks on yokels and performing
conjuring acts to impress various heads of state. he uses his incredible
gifts for what is essentially trifling entertainment. the fields
of possibility narrow gradually, as he visits ever more minor nobles
and performs ever more unimportant magic tricks, until the [CHARACTER]
of the first few scenes is entirely swallowed up in mediocrity. only
in the final scene is [CHARACTER] rescued from mediocrity, as the knowledge
of his impending doom restores his earlier gift of powerful rhetoric,
and he regains his sweeping sense of vision. now, however, the vision
that he sees is of hell looming up to swallow him. marlowe uses
much of his finest poetry to describe [CHARACTER]'s final hours, during
which [CHARACTER]'s desire for repentance finally wins out, although
too late. still, [CHARACTER] is restored to his earlier grandeur in his
closing speech, with its hurried rush from idea to idea and its despairing,
renaissance-renouncing last line, "i'll burn my books!" he becomes
once again a tragic hero, a great man undone because his ambitions
have butted up against the law of god.
