


Cleopatra 
The assortment of perspectives from which we see Cleopatra
illustrates the varying understandings of her as a decadent foreign woman
and a noble ruler. As Philo and Demetrius take the stage in Act
I, scene i, their complaints about Antony's neglected duties frame
the audience's understanding of Cleopatra, the queen for whom Antony
risks his reputation. Within the first ten lines of the play, the
men declare Cleopatra a lustful "gipsy," a description that is repeated
throughout the play as though by a chorus (I.i.10).
Cleopatra is labeled a "wrangling queen" (I.i.50),
a "slave" (I.iv.19), an "Egyptian dish" (II.vi.123),
and a "whore" (III.vi.67); she is called "Salt
Cleopatra" (II.i.21) and an enchantress who
has made Antony "the noble ruin of her magic" (III.x.18). 
But to view Cleopatra as such is to reduce her character
to the rather narrow perspective of the Romans, who, standing to
lose their honor or kingdoms through her agency, are most threatened by
her. Certainly this threat has much to do with Cleopatra's beauty and
open sexuality, which, as Enobarbus points out in his famous description
of her in Act II, scene ii, is awe-inspiring. But it is also a performance.
Indeed, when Cleopatra takes the stage, she does so as an actress,
elevating her passion, grief, and outrage to the most dramatic and
captivating level. As Enobarbus says, the queen did not walk through
the street, but rather 

                    Hop[ped] forty paces . . . 
                    And
having lost her breath, she spoke and panted,
                    That
she did make defect perfection,
                    And breathless,
pour breath forth.			
                    
                           
                           
                           (II.ii.235-238)

Whether whispering sweet words of love to Antony or railing
at a supposedly disloyal servant, Cleopatra leaves her onlookers
breathless. As Antony notes, she is a woman "[w]hom everything becomes--to
chide, to laugh / To weep" (I.i.51-52). It
is this ability to be the perfect embodiment of all things--beauty
and ugliness, virtue and vice--that Cleopatra stands to lose after
her defeat by Caesar. By parading her through the streets of Rome
as his trophy, he intends to reduce her character to a single, base
element--to immortalize her as a whore. If Antony cannot allow his
conception of self to expand to incorporate his defeats, then Cleopatra
cannot allow hers to be stripped to the image of a boy actor "squeaking Cleopatra .
. .  / I'th' posture of a whore" (V.ii.216-217).
Cleopatra often behaves childishly and with relentless self-absorption;
nevertheless, her charisma, strength, and indomitable will make
her one of Shakespeare's strongest, most awe-inspiring female characters.
