


Creon

Creon spends more time onstage in these three plays than
any other character except the Chorus. His presence is so constant
and his words so crucial to many parts of the plays that he cannot
be dismissed as simply the bureaucratic fool he sometimes seems
to be. Rather, he represents the very real power of human law and
of the human need for an orderly, stable society. When we first
see Creon in Oedipus the King, Creon is shown to
be separate from the citizens of Thebes. He tells Oedipus that he
has brought news from the oracle and suggests that Oedipus hear
it inside. Creon has the secretive, businesslike air of
a politician, which stands in sharp contrast to Oedipus, who tells
him to speak out in front of everybody. While Oedipus insists on
hearing Creon's news in public and builds his power as a political
leader by espousing a rhetoric of openness, Creon is a master of
manipulation. While Oedipus is intent on saying what he means and on
hearing the truth--even when Jocasta begs and pleads with him not to--Creon
is happy to dissemble and equivocate.
At lines 651-690, Creon
argues that he has no desire to usurp Oedipus as king because he,
Jocasta, and Oedipus rule the kingdom with equal power--Oedipus is
merely the king in name. This argument may seem convincing, partly
because at this moment in the play we are disposed to be sympathetic
toward Creon, since Oedipus has just ordered Creon's banishment.
In response to Oedipus's hotheaded foolishness, Creon sounds like
the voice of reason. Only in the final scene of Oedipus
the King, when Creon's short lines demonstrate his eagerness to
exile Oedipus and separate him from his children, do we see that
the title of king is what Creon desires above all.
Creon is at his most dissembling in Oedipus at
Colonus, where he once again needs something from Oedipus.
His honey-tongued speeches to Oedipus and Theseus are made all the
more ugly by his cowardly attempt to kidnap Antigone and Ismene.
In Antigone, we at last see Creon comfortable in
the place of power. Eteocles and Polynices, like their father, are
dead, and Creon holds the same unquestioned supremacy that Oedipus
once held. Of course, once Creon achieves the stability and power
that he sought and Oedipus possessed, he begins to echo Oedipus's
mistakes. Creon denounces Tiresias, for example (1144-1180),
obviously echoing Oedipus's denunciation in Oedipus the
King (366-507). And, of course, Creon's
penitent wailings in the final lines of Antigone echo those of Oedipus
at the end of Oedipus the King. What can perhaps most be said most
in favor of Creon is that in his final lines he also begins to sound
like Antigone, waiting for whatever new disaster fate will bring
him. He cries out that he is "nothing," "no one," but it is his suffering
that makes him seem human in the end.
