


[CHARACTER]
[CHARACTER] exemplifies the traits of the perfect hero. the
poem explores his heroism in two separate phases--youth and age--and through
three separate and increasingly difficult conflicts--with grendel,
grendel's mother, and the dragon. although we can view these three
encounters as expressions of the heroic code, there is perhaps a
clearer division between [CHARACTER]'s youthful heroism as an unfettered
warrior and his mature heroism as a reliable king. these two phases
of his life, separated by fifty years, correspond to two different
models of virtue, and much of the moral reflection in the story
centers on differentiating these two models and on showing how [CHARACTER]
makes the transition from one to the other.

in his youth, [CHARACTER] is a great warrior, characterized
predominantly by his feats of strength and courage, including his
fabled swimming match against breca. he also perfectly embodies
the manners and values dictated by the germanic heroic code, including loyalty,
courtesy, and pride. his defeat of grendel and grendel's mother
validates his reputation for bravery and establishes him fully as
a hero. in first part of the poem, [CHARACTER] matures little, as he
possesses heroic qualities in abundance from the start. having purged denmark
of its plagues and established himself as a hero, however, he is
ready to enter into a new phase of his life. hrothgar, who becomes
a mentor and father figure to the young warrior, begins to deliver
advice about how to act as a wise ruler. though [CHARACTER] does not
become king for many years, his exemplary career as a warrior has
served in part to prepare him for his ascension to the throne.
the second part of the story, set in geatland, skips over
the middle of [CHARACTER]'s career and focuses on the very end of his
life. through a series of retrospectives, however, we recover much
of what happens during this gap and therefore are able to see how [CHARACTER]
comports himself as both a warrior and a king. the period following
hygelac's death is an important transitional moment for [CHARACTER].
instead of rushing for the throne himself, as hrothulf does in denmark,
he supports hygelac's son, the rightful heir. with this gesture
of loyalty and respect for the throne, he proves himself worthy
of kingship.
in the final episode--the encounter with the dragon--the
poet reflects further on how the responsibilities of a king, who
must act for the good of the people and not just for his own glory,
differ from those of the heroic warrior. in light of these meditations,
[CHARACTER]'s moral status becomes somewhat ambiguous at the poem's
end. though he is deservedly celebrated as a great hero and leader,
his last courageous fight is also somewhat rash. the poem suggests
that, by sacrificing himself, [CHARACTER] unnecessarily leaves his people
without a king, exposing them to danger from other tribes. to understand
[CHARACTER]'s death strictly as a personal failure, however, is to neglect
the overwhelming emphasis given to fate in this last portion of
the poem. the conflict with the dragon has an aura of inevitability
about it. rather than a conscious choice, the battle can also be interpreted
as a matter in which [CHARACTER] has very little choice or free will
at all. additionally, it is hard to blame him for acting according to
the dictates of his warrior culture.
