


[CHARACTER]
up until his visit to the reservation and the introduction
of john, [CHARACTER] is the central figure of the novel. bernard's
first appearance in the novel is highly ironic. just as the director
finishes his explanation of how the world state has successfully
eliminated lovesickness, and everything that goes along with frustrated
desire, huxley gives us our first glimpse into a character's private
thoughts, and that character is lovesick, jealous, and fiercely
angry at his sexual rivals. thus, while bernard is not exactly heroic
(and he becomes even less so as the novel progresses), he is still
interesting to the reader because he is human. he wants things that
he can't have.
the major movement in bernard's character is his rise
in popularity after the trip to the reservation and his discovery
of john, followed by his disastrous fall. before and during his
trip to the reservation, bernard is lonely, insecure, and isolated.
when he returns with john, he uses his newfound popularity to participate
in all of the aspects of world state society that he had previously
criticized, such as promiscuous sex. this about-face proves bernard
to be a critic whose deepest desire is to become what he criticizes. when
john refuses to become a tool in bernard's attempt to remain popular,
bernard's success collapses instantaneously. by continuing to criticize
the world state while reveling in its "pleasant vices," bernard
reveals himself to be a hypocrite. john and helmholtz are sympathetic
to him because they agree that the world state needs criticizing
and because they recognize that bernard is trapped in a body to
which his conditioning has not suited him, but they have no respect
for him. lenina's relationship to bernard is different: she sees
him merely as a strange, interesting fellow with whom she can take
a break from her relationship with henry foster. she is happy to
use him for her own social gain, but she doesn't have the emotional
investment in him that she does in john.
