the fault in our stars

chapter one



late in the winter of my seventeenth year, my mother
decided i was depressed, presumably because i rarely left
the house, spent quite a lot of time in bed, read the same
book over and over, ate infrequently, and devoted quite a bit
of my abundant free time to thinking about death.

whenever you read a cancer booklet or website or
whatever, they always list depression among the side effects
of cancer. but, in fact, depression is not a side effect of
cancer. depression is a side effect of dying. (cancer is also
a side effect of dying. almost everything is, really.) but my
mom believed i required treatment, so she took me to see



3



john green



my regular doctor jim, who agreed that i was veritably
swimming in a paralyzing and totally clinical depression,
and that therefore my meds should be adjusted and also i
should attend a weekly support group.

this support group featured a rotating cast of charac-
ters in various states of tumor-driven unwellness. why did
the cast rotate? a side effect of dying.

the support group, of course, was depressing as hell.
it met every wednesday in the basement of a stone-walled
episcopal church shaped like a cross. we all sat in a circle
right in the middle of the cross, where the two boards would
have met, where the heart of jesus would have been.

i noticed this because patrick, the support group
leader and only person over eighteen in the room, talked
about the heart of jesus every freaking meeting, all about
how we, as young cancer survivors, were sitting right in
christ's very sacred heart and whatever.

so here's how it went in god's heart: the six or seven or
ten of us walked/wheeled in, grazed at a decrepit selection
of cookies and lemonade, sat down in the circle of trust,
and listened to patrick recount for the thousandth time his
depressingly miserable life story— how he had cancer in his
balls and they thought he was going to die but he didn't die
and now here he is, a full-grown adult in a church basement
in the 137th nicest city in america, divorced, addicted to
video games, mostly friendless, eking out a meager living



4



the fault in our stars



by exploiting his cancertastic past, slowly working his way
toward a master's degree that will not improve his career
prospects, waiting, as we all do, for the sword of damocles
to give him the relief that he escaped lo those many years
ago when cancer took both of his nuts but spared what only
the most generous soul would call his life.

and you too might be so lucky!

then we introduced ourselves: name. age. diagnosis.
and how we're doing today. i'm hazel, i'd say when they'd
get to me. sixteen. thyroid originally but with an impres-
sive and long-settled satellite colony in my lungs. and i'm
doing okay.

once we got around the circle, patrick always asked if
anyone wanted to share. and then began the circle jerk of
support: everyone talking about fighting and battling and
winning and shrinking and scanning. to be fair to patrick,
he let us talk about dying, too. but most of them weren't
dying. most would live into adulthood, as patrick had.

(which meant there was quite a lot of competitiveness
about it, with everybody wanting to beat not only cancer
itself, but also the other people in the room. like, i realize
that this is irrational, but when they tell you that you have,
say, a 20 percent chance of living five years, the math kicks
in and you figure that's one in five ... so you look around
and think, as any healthy person would: i gotta outlast four
of these bastards.)



5



john green



the only redeeming facet of support group was this
kid named isaac, a long-faced, skinny guy with straight
blond hair swept over one eye.

and his eyes were the problem. he had some
fantastically improbable eye cancer. one eye had been cut
out when he was a kid, and now he wore the kind of thick
glasses that made his eyes (both the real one and the glass
one) preternaturally huge, like his whole head was basically
just this fake eye and this real eye staring at you. from what
i could gather on the rare occasions when isaac shared with
the group, a recurrence had placed his remaining eye in
mortal peril.

isaac and i communicated almost exclusively through
sighs. each time someone discussed anticancer diets or
snorting ground-up shark fin or whatever, he'd glance
over at me and sigh ever so slightly. i'd shake my head
microscopically and exhale in response.

so support group blew, and after a few weeks, i grew to
be rather kicking-and-screaming about the whole affair.
in fact, on the wednesday i made the acquaintance of
augustus waters, i tried my level best to get out of support
group while sitting on the couch with my mom in the third
leg of a twelve-hour marathon of the previous season's
america's next top model, which admittedly i had already
seen, but still.



6



the fault in our stars



me: "i refuse to attend support group."

mom: "one of the symptoms of depression is disinter-
est in activities."

me: "please just let me watch america's next top model.
it's an activity."

mom: "television is a passivity."

me: "ugh, mom, please."

mom: "hazel, you're a teenager. you're not a little kid
anymore. you need to make friends, get out of the house,
and live your life."

me: "if you want me to be a teenager, don't send me to
support group. buy me a fake id so i can go to clubs, drink
vodka, and take pot."

mom: "you don't take pot, for starters."

me: "see, that's the kind of thing i'd know if you got
me a fake id."

mom: "you're going to support group."

me: "uggggggggggggg."

mom: "hazel, you deserve a life."

that shut me up, although i failed to see how
attendance at support group met the definition of life.
still, i agreed to go— after negotiating the right to record
the 1.5 episodes of antm i'd be missing.

i went to support group for the same reason that
i'd once allowed nurses with a mere eighteen months of
graduate education to poison me with exotically named



7



john green



chemicals: i wanted to make my parents happy. there is
only one thing in this world shittier than biting it from
cancer when you're sixteen, and that's having a kid who
bites it from cancer.

mom pulled into the circular driveway behind the church
at 4:56. i pretended to fiddle with my oxygen tank for a
second just to kill time.

"do you want me to carry it in for you?"

"no, it's fine," i said. the cylindrical green tank only
weighed a few pounds, and i had this little steel cart to
wheel it around behind me. it delivered two liters of oxygen
to me each minute through a cannula, a transparent tube
that split just beneath my neck, wrapped behind my ears,
and then reunited in my nostrils. the contraption was
necessary because my lungs sucked at being lungs.

"i love you," she said as i got out.

"you too, mom. see you at six."

"make friends!" she said through the rolled-down
window as i walked away.

i didn't want to take the elevator because taking the
elevator is a last days kind of activity at support group,
so i took the stairs. i grabbed a cookie and poured some
lemonade into a dixie cup and then turned around.

a boy was staring at me.

i was quite sure i'd never seen him before. long and



8



the fault in our stars



leanly muscular, he dwarfed the molded plastic elementary
school chair he was sitting in. mahogany hair, straight and
short. he looked my age, maybe a year older, and he sat
with his tailbone against the edge of the chair, his posture
aggressively poor, one hand half in a pocket of dark jeans.

i looked away, suddenly conscious of my myriad
insufficiencies. i was wearing old jeans, which had once
been tight but now sagged in weird places, and a yellow
t-shirt advertising a band i didn't even like anymore. also
my hair: i had this pageboy haircut, and i hadn't even
bothered to, like, brush it. furthermore, i had ridiculously
fat chipmunked cheeks, a side effect of treatment. i looked
like a normally proportioned person with a balloon for a
head. this was not even to mention the cankle situation.
and yet— i cut a glance to him, and his eyes were still on me.

it occurred to me why they call it eye contact.

i walked into the circle and sat down next to isaac,
two seats away from the boy. i glanced again. he was still
watching me.

look, let me just say it: he was hot. a nonhot boy
stares at you relentlessly and it is, at best, awkward and, at
worst, a form of assault. but a hot boy . . . well.

i pulled out my phone and clicked it so it would dis-
play the time: 4:59. the circle filled in with the unlucky
twelve-to-eighteens, and then patrick started us out with
the serenity prayer: god, grant me the serenity to accept the things



9



john green



i cannot change, the courage to change the things i can, and the wis-
dom to know the difference. the guy was still staring at me. i
felt rather blushy.

finally, i decided that the proper strategy was to stare
back. boys do not have a monopoly on the staring business,
after all. so i looked him over as patrick acknowledged for
the thousandth time his ball-lessness etc., and soon it was
a staring contest. after a while the boy smiled, and then
finally his blue eyes glanced away. when he looked back at
me, i flicked my eyebrows up to say, i win.

he shrugged. patrick continued and then finally it was
time for the introductions. "isaac, perhaps you'd like to go
first today. i know you're facing a challenging time."

"yeah," isaac said. "i'm isaac. i'm seventeen. and it's
looking like i have to get surgery in a couple weeks, after
which i'll be blind. not to complain or anything because i
know a lot of us have it worse, but yeah, i mean, being blind
does sort of suck. my girlfriend helps, though. and friends
like augustus." he nodded toward the boy, who now had
a name. "so, yeah," isaac continued. he was looking at his
hands, which he'd folded into each other like the top of a
tepee. "there's nothing you can do about it."

"we're here for you, isaac," patrick said. "let isaac hear
it, guys." and then we all, in a monotone, said, "we're here
for you, isaac."

michael was next. he was twelve. he had leukemia.



10



the fault in our stars



he'd always had leukemia. he was okay. (or so he said. he'd
taken the elevator.)

lida was sixteen, and pretty enough to be the object
of the hot boy's eye. she was a regular— in a long remission
from appendiceal cancer, which i had not previously known
existed. she said— as she had every other time i'd attended
support group— that she felt strong, which felt like bragging
to me as the oxygen-drizzling nubs tickled my nostrils.

there were five others before they got to him. he smiled
a little when his turn came. his voice was low, smoky, and
dead sexy. "my name is augustus waters," he said. "i'm
seventeen. i had a little touch of osteosarcoma a year and a
half ago, but i'm just here today at isaac's request."

"and how are you feeling?" asked patrick.

"oh, i'm grand." augustus waters smiled with a corner
of his mouth. "i'm on a roller coaster that only goes up, my
friend."

when it was my turn, i said, "my name is hazel. i'm
sixteen. thyroid with mets in my lungs. i'm okay."

the hour proceeded apace: fights were recounted,
battles won amid wars sure to be lost; hope was clung to;
families were both celebrated and denounced; it was agreed
that friends just didn't get it; tears were shed; comfort
proffered. neither augustus waters nor i spoke again until
patrick said, "augustus, perhaps you'd like to share your
fears with the group."



11



john green



"my fears?"
"yes."

"i fear oblivion," he said without a moment's pause.
"i fear it like the proverbial blind man who's afraid of the
dark."

"too soon," isaac said, cracking a smile.

"was that insensitive?" augustus asked. "i can be
pretty blind to other people's feelings."

isaac was laughing, but patrick raised a chastening
finger and said, "augustus, please. let's return to you and
your struggles. you said you fear oblivion?"

"i did," augustus answered.

patrick seemed lost. "would, uh, would anyone like to
speak to that?"

i hadn't been in proper school in three years. my
parents were my two best friends. my third best friend was
an author who did not know i existed. i was a fairly shy
person— not the hand-raising type.

and yet, just this once, i decided to speak. i half raised
my hand and patrick, his delight evident, immediately said,
"hazel!" i was, i'm sure he assumed, opening up. becoming
part of the group.

i looked over at augustus waters, who looked back
at me. you could almost see through his eyes they were
so blue. "there will come a time," i said, "when all of us
are dead. all of us. there will come a time when there are



12



the fault in our stars



no human beings remaining to remember that anyone
ever existed or that our species ever did anything. there
will be no one left to remember aristotle or cleopatra, let
alone you. everything that we did and built and wrote and
thought and discovered will be forgotten and all of this"— i
gestured encompassingly— "will have been for naught.
maybe that time is coming soon and maybe it is millions of
years away, but even if we survive the collapse of our sun, we
will not survive forever. there was time before organisms
experienced consciousness, and there will be time after.
and if the inevitability of human oblivion worries you, i
encourage you to ignore it. god knows that's what everyone
else does."

i'd learned this from my aforementioned third best
friend, peter van houten, the reclusive author of an imperial
affliction, the book that was as close a thing as i had to a
bible. peter van houten was the only person i'd ever come
across who seemed to (a) understand what it's like to be
dying, and (b) not have died.

after i finished, there was quite a long period of silence
as i watched a smile spread all the way across augustus's
face— not the little crooked smile of the boy trying to be
sexy while he stared at me, but his real smile, too big for
his face. "goddamn," augustus said quietly. "aren't you
something else."

neither of us said anything for the rest of support



13



john green



group. at the end, we all had to hold hands, and patrick led
us in a prayer. "lord jesus christ, we are gathered here in
your heart, literally in your heart, as cancer survivors. you and
you alone know us as we know ourselves. guide us to life
and the light through our times of trial. we pray for isaac's
eyes, for michael's and jamie's blood, for augustus's bones,
for hazel's lungs, for james's throat. we pray that you
might heal us and that we might feel your love, and your
peace, which passes all understanding. and we remember in
our hearts those whom we knew and loved who have gone
home to you: maria and kade and joseph and haley and
abigail and angelina and taylor and gabriel and . . ."

it was a long list. the world contains a lot of dead
people. and while patrick droned on, reading the list from
a sheet of paper because it was too long to memorize, i
kept my eyes closed, trying to think prayerfully but mostly
imagining the day when my name would find its way onto
that list, all the way at the end when everyone had stopped
listening.

when patrick was finished, we said this stupid mantra
together-living our best life today-and it was
over. augustus waters pushed himself out of his chair and
walked over to me. his gait was crooked like his smile. he
towered over me, but he kept his distance so i wouldn't
have to crane my neck to look him in the eye. "what's your
name?" he asked.

"hazel."



14



the fault in our stars



"no, your full name."

"um, hazel grace lancaster." he was just about to say
something else when isaac walked up. "hold on," augustus
said, raising a finger, and turned to isaac. "that was actually
worse than you made it out to be."

"i told you it was bleak."

"why do you bother with it?"

"i don't know. it kind of helps?"

augustus leaned in so he thought i couldn't hear.
"she's a regular?" i couldn't hear isaac's comment, but
augustus responded, "i'll say." he clasped isaac by both
shoulders and then took a half step away from him. "tell
hazel about clinic."

isaac leaned a hand against the snack table and
focused his huge eye on me. "okay, so i went into clinic
this morning, and i was telling my surgeon that i'd rather
be deaf than blind. and he said, 'it doesn't work that way,'
and i was, like, 'yeah, i realize it doesn't work that way; i'm
just saying i'd rather be deaf than blind if i had the choice,
which i realize i don't have,' and he said, 'well, the good
news is that you won't be deaf,' and i was like, 'thank
you for explaining that my eye cancer isn't going to make
me deaf. i feel so fortunate that an intellectual giant like
yourself would deign to operate on me.'"

"he sounds like a winner," i said. "i'm gonna try to get
me some eye cancer just so i can make this guy's acquain-
tance."



15



john green



"good luck with that. all right, i should go. monica's
waiting for me. i gotta look at her a lot while i can."

"counterinsurgence tomorrow?" augustus asked.

"definitely." isaac turned and ran up the stairs, taking
them two at a time.

augustus waters turned to me. "literally," he said.

"literally?" i asked.

"we are literally in the heart of jesus," he said. "i
thought we were in a church basement, but we are literally
in the heart of jesus."

"someone should tell jesus," i said. "i mean, it's gotta
be dangerous, storing children with cancer in your heart."

"i would tell him myself," augustus said, "but
unfortunately i am literally stuck inside of his heart, so he
won't be able to hear me." i laughed. he shook his head,
just looking at me.

"what?" i asked.

"nothing," he said.

"why are you looking at me like that?"

augustus half smiled. "because you're beautiful. i
enjoy looking at beautiful people, and i decided a while ago
not to deny myself the simpler pleasures of existence." a
brief awkward silence ensued. augustus plowed through: "i
mean, particularly given that, as you so deliciously pointed
out, all of this will end in oblivion and everything."

i kind of scoffed or sighed or exhaled in a way that was
vaguely coughy and then said, "i'm not beau—"



16



the fault in our stars



"you're like a millennial natalie portman. like v for
vendetta natalie portman."
"never seen it," i said.

"really?" he asked. "pixie-haired gorgeous girl dislikes
authority and can't help but fall for a boy she knows is
trouble. it's your autobiography, so far as i can tell."

his every syllable flirted. honestly, he kind of turned
me on. i didn't even know that guys could turn me on— not,
like, in real life.

a younger girl walked past us. "how's it going, alisa?"
he asked. she smiled and mumbled, "hi, augustus."
"memorial people," he explained. memorial was the big
research hospital. "where do you go?"

"children's," i said, my voice smaller than i expected
it to be. he nodded. the conversation seemed over. "well,"
i said, nodding vaguely toward the steps that led us out of
the literal heart of jesus. i tilted my cart onto its wheels
and started walking. he limped beside me. "so, see you next
time, maybe?" i asked.

"you should see it," he said. "v for vendetta, i mean."

"okay," i said. "i'll look it up."

"no. with me. at my house," he said. "now."

i stopped walking. "i hardly know you, augustus
waters. you could be an ax murderer."

he nodded. "true enough, hazel grace." he walked
past me, his shoulders filling out his green knit polo shirt,
his back straight, his steps lilting just slightly to the right as



17



john green



he walked steady and confident on what i had determined
was a prosthetic leg. osteosarcoma sometimes takes a limb
to check you out. then, if it likes you, it takes the rest.

i followed him upstairs, losing ground as i made my
way up slowly, stairs not being a field of expertise for my
lungs.

and then we were out of jesus's heart and in the
parking lot, the spring air just on the cold side of perfect,
the late-afternoon light heavenly in its hurtfulness.

mom wasn't there yet, which was unusual, because
mom was almost always waiting for me. i glanced around
and saw that a tall, curvy brunette girl had isaac pinned
against the stone wall of the church, kissing him rather
aggressively. they were close enough to me that i could hear
the weird noises of their mouths together, and i could hear
him saying, "always," and her saying, "always," in return.

suddenly standing next to me, augustus half
whispered, "they're big believers in pda."

"what's with the 'always'?" the slurping sounds
intensified.

"always is their thing. they'll always love each other
and whatever. i would conservatively estimate they have
texted each other the word always four million times in the
last year."

a couple more cars drove up, taking michael and alisa
away. it was just augustus and me now, watching isaac and
monica, who proceeded apace as if they were not leaning



18



the fault in our stars



against a place of worship. his hand reached for her boob
over her shirt and pawed at it, his palm still while his fingers
moved around. i wondered if that felt good. didn't seem
like it would, but i decided to forgive isaac on the grounds
that he was going blind. the senses must feast while there
is yet hunger and whatever.

"imagine taking that last drive to the hospital," i said
quietly. "the last time you'll ever drive a car."

without looking over at me, augustus said, "you're
killing my vibe here, hazel grace. i'm trying to observe
young love in its many-splendored awkwardness."

"i think he's hurting her boob," i said.

"yes, it's difficult to ascertain whether he is trying
to arouse her or perform a breast exam." then augustus
waters reached into a pocket and pulled out, of all things,
a pack of cigarettes. he flipped it open and put a cigarette
between his lips.

"are you serious?" i asked. "you think that's cool? oh,
my god, you just ruined the whole thing."

"which whole thing?" he asked, turning to me. the
cigarette dangled unlit from the unsmiling corner of his
mouth.

"the whole thing where a boy who is not unattractive
or unintelligent or seemingly in any way unacceptable
stares at me and points out incorrect uses of literality and
compares me to actresses and asks me to watch a movie at
his house. but of course there is always a hamartia and yours



19



john green



is that oh, my god, even though you had freaking
cancer you give money to a company in exchange for the
chance to acquire yet more cancer. oh, my god. let
me just assure you that not being able to breathe? sucks.
totally disappointing. totally."

"a hamartia?" he asked, the cigarette still in his mouth.
it tightened his jaw. he had a hell of ajawline, unfortunately.

"a fatal flaw," i explained, turning away from him. i
stepped toward the curb, leaving augustus waters behind
me, and then i heard a car start down the street. it was
mom. she'd been waiting for me to, like, make friends or
whatever.

i felt this weird mix of disappointment and anger
welling up inside of me. i don't even know what the feeling
was, really, just that there was a lot of it, and i wanted to
smack augustus waters and also replace my lungs with
lungs that didn't suck at being lungs. i was standing with
my chuck taylors on the very edge of the curb, the oxygen
tank ball-and-chaining in the cart by my side, and right as
my mom pulled up, i felt a hand grab mine.

i yanked my hand free but turned back to him.

"they don't kill you unless you light them," he said
as mom arrived at the curb. "and i've never lit one. it's a
metaphor, see: you put the killing thing right between your
teeth, but you don't give it the power to do its killing."

"it's a metaphor," i said, dubious. mom was just idling.



20



the fault in our stars



"it's a metaphor," he said.

"you choose your behaviors based on their metaphori-
cal resonances ..." i said.

"oh, yes." he smiled. the big, goofy, real smile. "i'm a
big believer in metaphor, hazel grace."

i turned to the car. tapped the window. it rolled down.
"i'm going to a movie with augustus waters," i said. "please
record the next several episodes of the antm marathon for
me."
