


the [CHARACTER]
like jonas, who is a young person with the wisdom of an
old person, the [CHARACTER] is a bit of a paradox. he looks ancient, but
he is not old at all. like someone who has seen and done many things
over many years, he is very wise and world-weary, and he is haunted
by memories of suffering and pain, but in reality his life has been
surprisingly uneventful. in the world of the community, the [CHARACTER]
has spent most of his life inside his comfortable living quarters,
eating his meals and emerging occasionally to take long walks. yet
he carries the memories of an entire community, so he feels like
a man who has done more in his life than anyone else in the world:
he has experienced the positive and negative emotions, desires,
triumphs, and failures of millions of men and women, as well as
animals. he is responsible for preserving those memories and using
the wisdom they give him to make decisions for the community. anyone
would feel weighted down by this enormous responsibility, and because the
[CHARACTER] is forbidden to share his knowledge and pain with anyone else,
including his spouse and his children, the weight is more difficult
to bear. thus, the [CHARACTER] has become an exceptionally patient, quiet,
deliberate person, growing resigned to the fact that he cannot change
the community even though he realizes that it needs to be changed.
he endures his loneliness and frustration as well as the increasing
physical pain that the memories bring him with a quiet calm that
makes him a rather stoic figure. his patience, wisdom, and restraint
make him an excellent teacher and mentor.
however, the memories that the [CHARACTER] carries inside him
are too powerful for him to be entirely stoic: he still feels strong
emotions, and under the right circumstances they surge to the surface.
among the members of the community, the [CHARACTER] alone is capable of
real love, an emotion he experiences with rosemary, the first child
who was designated to be the receiver. years of loneliness, isolation,
and unshared emotion made the [CHARACTER]'s love for rosemary intense,
even by the standards of the time before sameness, and when she
is taken from him, his anger and grief are equally intense. it is
this anger and grief, fueled by the [CHARACTER]'s growing love for jonas
and jonas's own youthful energy, that allow the [CHARACTER] to finally
overturn his years of silence and endurance and change the community.
the decision is also influenced by the [CHARACTER]'s aptitude as a teacher
and advisor: it is natural for him to want to help the community
learn to handle the memories, as he has helped rosemary and jonas.
