


[CHARACTER]
[CHARACTER] begins the novella
as a benighted, if exceptional, youth, who has only barely realized
that he might be different from those around him. he regrets his
differences and tries to bring himself into conformity. his relationship
with international 4-8818, his only friend,
exemplifies the halfhearted attempts he makes to eliminate all his
preferences for individual people, to care for each brother equally,
and to be identical to his brothers. after the discovery of the
tunnel, however, he realizes that solitude pleases him, and it becomes
harder for him to deny his own individuality.

when [CHARACTER] meets the
golden one, he no longer wants to deny that he prefers some of his
peers to others. because he wants to think about her all the time,
and because the urge is so overwhelming, he gives himself to his
sin. in so doing, he takes his first major step down the road toward
breaking with society. moreover, the golden one represents [CHARACTER]'s
first meaningful encounter with another human being. his relationship
with her baffles him. he knows that he wants to possess her, but
he does not know why. he admires her haughtiness and her strength,
and he knows she admires the same things in him, but he does not
understand why his preference for her is so overpowering.
the discovery of the lightbulb pushes [CHARACTER] into
complete rebellion. he now has a cause for which he would give his
life. until the moment when the world council threatens to destroy
the lightbulb, [CHARACTER] thinks of
his brothers and their welfare. because he will not abide seeing
the lightbulb destroyed, even though he might tolerate his own destruction,
he is forced into exile from his society. [CHARACTER] realizes
that he actually created the lightbulb for its own sake and that
he does want to live because his body is strong and youthful and
beautiful--a realization that severs his last connections to society
and makes him a free man.
once he has broken from society, [CHARACTER] adopts
a vanity and pride unknown in the society in which he was raised
and, in so doing, he realizes his manhood. for the first time, [CHARACTER] feels
pride at killing his own food and pleasure in eating, and when he
meets up again with the golden one, he enjoys sex for the first
time. the ecstasy he discovers in his body mirrors the ecstasy of his
mind. by breaking from the confines of society, [CHARACTER] becomes
his own man in both his mind and his body.
the abandoned house in the forest represents [CHARACTER]'s ability
to provide for himself on a permanent basis. he is very proprietary
about the house and its contents, and it provides the key to his
epiphany. upon discovering the "i" while he is reading in the library
in the house, [CHARACTER] suddenly becomes
aware that he is the center of his own universe, and the curse he
has been fighting is actually a blessing to be embraced. he realizes
that he is an end in himself and that his happiness is reason enough
to live. with this epiphany, his transformation is complete. he
is unafraid and singular, self-important and proud. he has discovered
himself and become his own man.
rand intends [CHARACTER]'s
name to be ironic, since we know that [CHARACTER] is
far superior to his peers and does not believe in the doctrine of
equality. his decision to discard his given name shows his frustration
with his society, his unwillingness to be held back among the masses.
in renaming himself prometheus, [CHARACTER] shows
that he identifies himself with the bringer of light, fire, and
progress in greek mythology. he considers himself a hero who, like
prometheus, must defy the conventions of his time.
