


the [CHARACTER]

though the [CHARACTER] undergoes several name changes,
she herself is fairly static throughout the novella. from the beginning,
she is haughty and proud, rejecting all society except equality 7-2521, whom
she adores from the outset because he is stronger and sharper than
the rest of her brothers. she becomes subservient to him almost immediately,
seeking to care for him as early as the third time they meet, when
she provides him with water to cool himself. by the time she follows
him into the forest, she has become totally his possession, and
she remains that way until the end. 
although she is a static character, the [CHARACTER] does
exhibit extraordinary curiosity when it comes to finding the "i"
and her uncommon beauty. though the only reason the [CHARACTER] seeks to
say "i" is to tell equality 7-2521 that she
loves him, a far less noble goal than his effort at self-actualization,
she is nevertheless superior to those around her because she at
least suspects that there is more to the world than the collective
equality enforced in her society. additionally, she stands out from
the faceless, nameless masses because she is incredibly beautiful,
a sign from rand, who views physical beauty as the natural counterpart
to intellectual and personal integrity, that she is a good character
in the novella. despite the poor development of her character, then,
we know quite a bit about the [CHARACTER]'s attitude toward her culture
and society, and her rejection of both is enough to exalt her in
the novella to special status.
the [CHARACTER] is a problematic character, however, because her
originality is at odds with her subservience to equality 7-2521. on
the one hand, she is the female counterpart to equality 7-2521 in
that she is curious and seeks solitude. for this reason, we might expect
to read a considerable amount about her thoughts and reactions or
conversation with equality 7-2521. but the
[CHARACTER] has almost no lines in the novella, and she fades into
the background when equality 7-2521 finally
realizes his own self-importance. on the other hand, though she
is equality 7-2521's counterpart she totally
abdicates control to him and is remarkably underdeveloped, especially
considering that she is the only other consistently present character
in the novella. though her name is originally liberty 5-3000,
she allows equality 7-2521 to rename her
the [CHARACTER] and, later, gaea. her willingness to accept the new
names that equality 7-2521 gives her is a
symptom of her broader willingness to accept the identity that he
conceives for her. her subservience and underdevelopment are troubling
because in her character rand presents the novella's only other
example of goodness in a collective society. but because the golden
one has no personal characteristics of her own, she ultimately serves
as a flat mirror to equality 7-2521, revealing
little about rand's philosophy that we do not already glean from
equality 7-2521.
