


[CHARACTER] 
before aeneas's arrival, [CHARACTER] is the confident
and competent ruler of carthage, a city she founded on the coast
of north africa. she is resolute, we learn, in her determination
not to marry again and to preserve the memory of her dead husband, sychaeus,
whose murder at the hands of pygmalion, her brother, caused her
to flee her native tyre. despite this turmoil, she maintains her
focus on her political responsibilities.

virgil depicts the suddenness of the change that love
provokes in the queen with the image of [CHARACTER] as the victim of cupid's
arrow, which strikes her almost like madness or a disease. [CHARACTER]
tells her sister that a flame has been reignited within her. while
flames and fire are traditional, almost cliched images associated
with love, fire is also a natural force of destruction and uncontrollable
chaos. [CHARACTER] risks everything by falling for aeneas, and when this
love fails, she finds herself unable to reassume her dignified position.
by taking aeneas as a lover, she compromises her previously untainted
loyalty to her dead husband's memory. she loses the support of carthage's citizens,
who have seen their queen indulge an amorous obsession at the expense
of her civic responsibilities. further, by dallying with another
foreigner, [CHARACTER] alienates the local african chieftains who had approached
her as suitors and now pose a military threat. her irrational obsession
drives her to a frenzied suicide, out of the tragedy of her situation
and the pain of lost love, but also out of a sense of diminished
possibilities for the future.
[CHARACTER] plays a role in the first four books of the epic
similar to that which turnus plays at the end. she is a figure of
passion and volatility, qualities that contrast with aeneas's order
and control, and traits that virgil associated with rome itself
in his own day. [CHARACTER] also represents the sacrifice aeneas makes
to pursue his duty. if fate were to allow him to remain in carthage,
he would rule a city beside a queen he loves without enduring the
further hardships of war. aeneas encounters [CHARACTER]'s shade in the
underworld just before the future legacy of rome is revealed to
him, and again he admits that his abandonment of the queen was not
an act of his own will. this encounter with lost love, though poignant,
is dwarfed by anchises's subsequent revelation of the glory of rome.
through [CHARACTER], virgil affirms order, duty, and history at the expense
of romantic love.
