


the [CHARACTER] 

the [CHARACTER] is presented more fully than any
other european in the novel besides crusoe, more vividly portrayed
than crusoe's widow friend or his family members. he appears in
the narrative at two very important junctures in crusoe's life.
first, it is the [CHARACTER] who picks up crusoe after the
escape from the moors and takes him to brazil, where crusoe establishes
himself as a plantation owner. twenty-eight years later, it is again
the [CHARACTER] who informs crusoe that his brazilian investments
are secure, and who arranges the sale of the plantation and the
forwarding of the proceeds to crusoe. in both cases, the portuguese
captain is the agent of crusoe's extreme good fortune. in this sense,
he represents the benefits of social connections. if the captain
had not been located in lisbon, crusoe never would have cashed in
on his brazilian holdings. this assistance from social contacts
contradicts the theme of solitary enterprise that the novel seems
to endorse. despite crusoe's hard individual labor on the island,
it is actually another human being--and not his
own resourcefulness--that makes crusoe wealthy in the end. yet it
is doubtful whether this insight occurs to crusoe, despite his obvious
gratitude toward the captain.
	moreover, the [CHARACTER] is associated with a
wide array of virtues. he is honest, informing crusoe of the money
he has borrowed against crusoe's investments, and repaying a part
of it immediately even though it is financially difficult for him
to do so. he is loyal, honoring his duties toward crusoe even after
twenty-eight years. finally, he is extremely generous, paying crusoe
more than market value for the animal skins and slave boy after
picking crusoe up at sea, and giving crusoe handsome gifts when
leaving brazil. all these virtues make the captain a paragon of
human excellence, and they make us wonder why defoe includes such
a character in the novel. in some ways, the captain's goodness makes
him the moral counterpart of friday, since the european seaman and
the caribbean cannibal mirror each other in benevolence and devotion
to crusoe. the captain's goodness thus makes it impossible for us
to make oversimplified oppositions between a morally bankrupt europe
on the one hand, and innocent noble savages on the other.

