


[CHARACTER]
gene is the novel's narrator, and he tells the story as
a flashback, reflecting on his days at the devon school from the
vantage point of adulthood. he is the source of all of the reader's
information in the novel and yet proves somewhat unreliable as a
narrator--especially regarding insights into his own motivations.
we first meet him as an older man returning to the place where he
spent his adolescence; we thus initially attribute the wisdom of
maturity to him and assume that he brings a certain degree of perspective
to his memories of devon. but even the adult gene seems filled with
fears and insecurities; his great worry, we realize, is that nothing
has changed since adolescence--not the school buildings and not,
most important, himself. we are then plunged into his memories of
an idyllic summer session preceding his senior year in high school
and his friendship with the athletic, spirited finny. but what gene
initially presents as a perfect friendship soon emerges as nothing
of the sort; his account of certain actions, along with statements
that seem insincere or strained, soon betray his true feelings.
thus, gene initially asserts that finny resents him for
his academic success. the reader quickly comes to realize, however,
that it is gene, in fact, who resents finny--indeed, he resents finny
all the more for finny's lack of resentment toward him.

finny's fall constitutes the climax of the story, and,
afterward, all of gene's resentments fade away. by crippling finny,
he brings him down to his own level. as gene and finny subsequently
become increasingly codependent, the reader comes to see that gene's forced
equalization of the two boys may have been darkly deliberate--it
may have stemmed from a deep desire within gene to blur his own
identity, to lose himself in another. gene's act of putting on finny's
clothes and standing in front of the mirror, feeling strangely peaceful,
symbolizes his desire to leave behind his own self and become finny.
as the object of gene's jealousy, finny is, in the language of the
novel's dominating metaphor, the object of gene's own private "war";
yet, as the mirror scene and other episodes make clear, finny is
also gene's great love. because of gene's own insecurities and smallness
of self, however, he can realize this love only after crippling
finny, for only then can his mixed awe and resentment give way to
pure devotion. it is never clear whether, in jouncing finny from
the tree, the young gene is motivated by an unconscious impulse
or a conscious design. what he certainly does not know, however,
is that the fall from the tree will set in motion the chain of events
leading to finny's death, making gene finny's killer, the destroyer
of the thing that he loves most. gene's fatal tendency to blur love
and hate, his deep desire to blur his own identity into finny's,
is at the core of the novel's tragedy.
