hedda gabler

by henrik ibsen


translated by edmund gosse and william archer


introduction by william archer





introduction.


from munich, on june 29, 1890, ibsen wrote to the swedish poet, count
carl soilsky: "our intention has all along been to spend the summer in
the tyrol again. but circumstances are against our doing so. i am at
present engaged upon a new dramatic work, which for several reasons has
made very slow progress, and i do not leave munich until i can take with
me the completed first draft. there is little or no prospect of my being
able to complete it in july." ibsen did not leave munich at all that
season. on october 30 he wrote: "at present i am utterly engrossed in
a new play. not one leisure hour have i had for several months." three
weeks later (november 20) he wrote to his french translator, count
prozor: "my new play is finished; the manuscript went off to copenhagen
the day before yesterday.... it produces a curious feeling of emptiness
to be thus suddenly separated from a work which has occupied one's time
and thoughts for several months, to the exclusion of all else. but it is
a good thing, too, to have done with it. the constant intercourse with
the fictitious personages was beginning to make me quite nervous." to
the same correspondent he wrote on december 4: "the title of the play is
_hedda gabler_. my intention in giving it this name was to indicate
that hedda, as a personality, is to be regarded rather as her father's
daughter than as her husband's wife. it was not my desire to deal in
this play with so-called problems. what i principally wanted to do was
to depict human beings, human emotions, and human destinies, upon a
groundwork of certain of the social conditions and principles of the
present day."

so far we read the history of the play in the official
"correspondence."(1) some interesting glimpses into the poet's moods
during the period between the completion of _the lady from the sea_
and the publication of _hedda gabler_ are to be found in the series of
letters to fraulein emilie bardach, of vienna, published by dr. george
brandes.(2) this young lady ibsen met at gossensass in the tyrol in
the autumn of 1889. the record of their brief friendship belongs to the
history of _the master builder_ rather than to that of _hedda gabler_,
but the allusions to his work in his letters to her during the winter of
1889 demand some examination.

so early as october 7, 1889, he writes to her: "a new poem begins to
dawn in me. i will execute it this winter, and try to transfer to it
the bright atmosphere of the summer. but i feel that it will end in
sadness--such is my nature." was this "dawning" poem _hedda gabler_? or
was it rather _the master builder_ that was germinating in his mind? who
shall say? the latter hypothesis seems the more probable, for it is hard
to believe that at any stage in the incubation of _hedda gabler_ he can
have conceived it as even beginning in gaiety. a week later, however,
he appears to have made up his mind that the time had not come for the
poetic utilisation of his recent experiences. he writes on october 15:
"here i sit as usual at my writing-table. now i would fain work, but
am unable to. my fancy, indeed, is very active. but it always wanders
away ours. i cannot repress my summer memories--nor do i wish to. i live
through my experience again and again and yet again. to transmute it
all into a poem, i find, in the meantime, impossible." clearly, then,
he felt that his imagination ought to have been engaged on some theme
having no relation to his summer experiences--the theme, no doubt, of
_hedda gabler_. in his next letter, dated october 29, he writes: "do not
be troubled because i cannot, in the meantime, create (_dichten_). in
reality i am for ever creating, or, at any rate, dreaming of something
which, when in the fulness of time it ripens, will reveal itself as
a creation (_dichtung_)." on november 19 he says: "i am very busily
occupied with preparations for my new poem. i sit almost the whole day
at my writing-table. go out only in the evening for a little while." the
five following letters contain no allusion to the play; but on september
18, 1890, he wrote: "my wife and son are at present at riva, on the lake
of garda, and will probably remain there until the middle of october,
or even longer. thus i am quite alone here, and cannot get away. the new
play on which i am at present engaged will probably not be ready until
november, though i sit at my writing-table daily, and almost the whole
day long."

here ends the history of _hedda gabler_, so far as the poet's
letters carry us. its hard clear outlines, and perhaps somewhat bleak
atmosphere, seem to have resulted from a sort of reaction against the
sentimental "dreamery" begotten of his gossensass experiences. he
sought refuge in the chill materialism of hedda from the ardent
transcendentalism of hilda, whom he already heard knocking at the door.
he was not yet in the mood to deal with her on the plane of poetry.(3)

_hedda gabler_ was published in copenhagen on december 16, 1890. this
was the first of ibsen's plays to be translated from proof-sheets and
published in england and america almost simultaneously with its first
appearance in scandinavia. the earliest theatrical performance took
place at the residenz theater, munich, on the last day of january 1891,
in the presence of the poet, frau conrad-ramlo playing the title-part.
the lessing theater, berlin, followed suit on february 10. not till
february 25 was the play seen in copenhagen, with fru hennings as hedda.
on the following night it was given for the first time in christiania,
the norwegian hedda being froken constance bruun. it was this production
which the poet saw when he visited the christiania theater for the first
time after his return to norway, august 28, 1891. it would take pages
to give even the baldest list of the productions and revivals of _hedda
gabler_ in scandinavia and germany, where it has always ranked among
ibsen's most popular works. the admirable production of the play by miss
elizabeth robins and miss marion lea, at the vaudeville theatre,
london, april 20, 1891, may rank as the second great step towards
the popularisation of ibsen in england, the first being the
charrington-achurch production of _a doll's house_ in 1889. miss robins
afterwards repeated her fine performance of hedda many times, in london,
in the english provinces, and in new york. the character has also been
acted in london by eleonora duse, and as i write (march, 5, 1907) by
mrs. patrick campbell, at the court theatre. in australia and america,
hedda has frequently been acted by miss nance o'neill and other
actresses--quite recently by a russian actress, madame alla nazimova,
who (playing in english) seems to have made a notable success both in
this part and in nora. the first french hedda gabler was mlle. marthe
brandes, who played the part at the vaudeville theatre, paris, on
december 17, 1891, the performance being introduced by a lecture by m.
jules lemaitre. in holland, in italy, in russia, the play has been acted
times without number. in short (as might easily have been foretold) it
has rivalled _a doll's house_ in world-wide popularity.

it has been suggested,(4) i think without sufficient ground, that ibsen
deliberately conceived _hedda gabler_ as an "international" play, and
that the scene is really the "west end" of any european city. to me
it seems quite clear that ibsen had christiania in mind, and the
christiania of a somewhat earlier period than the 'nineties. the
electric cars, telephones, and other conspicuous factors in the life of
a modern capital are notably absent from the play. there is no electric
light in secretary falk's villa. it is still the habit for ladies to
return on foot from evening parties, with gallant swains escorting them.
this "suburbanism," which so distressed the london critics of 1891,
was characteristic of the christiania ibsen himself had known in the
'sixties--the christiania of _love's comedy_--rather than of the
greatly extended and modernised city of the end of the century. moreover
lovborg's allusions to the fiord, and the suggested picture of sheriff
elvsted, his family and his avocations are all distinctively norwegian.
the truth seems to be very simple--the environment and the subsidiary
personages are all thoroughly national, but hedda herself is an
"international" type, a product of civilisation by no means peculiar to
norway.

we cannot point to any individual model or models who "sat to" ibsen for
the character of hedda.(5) the late grant allen declared that hedda was
"nothing more nor less than the girl we take down to dinner in london
nineteen times out of twenty"; in which case ibsen must have suffered
from a superfluidity of models, rather than from any difficulty in
finding one. but the fact is that in this, as in all other instances,
the word "model" must be taken in a very different sense from that in
which it is commonly used in painting. ibsen undoubtedly used models for
this trait and that, but never for a whole figure. if his characters can
be called portraits at all, they are composite portraits. even when it
seems pretty clear that the initial impulse towards the creation of a
particular character came from some individual, the original figure is
entirely transmuted in the process of harmonisation with the dramatic
scheme. we need not, therefore, look for a definite prototype of hedda;
but dr. brandes shows that two of that lady's exploits were probably
suggested by the anecdotic history of the day.

ibsen had no doubt heard how the wife of a well-known norwegian
composer, in a fit of raging jealousy excited by her husband's prolonged
absence from home, burnt the manuscript of a symphony which he had just
finished. the circumstances under which hedda burns lovborg's manuscript
are, of course, entirely different and infinitely more dramatic;
but here we have merely another instance of the dramatisation or
"poetisation" of the raw material of life. again, a still more painful
incident probably came to his knowledge about the same time. a beautiful
and very intellectual woman was married to a well-known man who had been
addicted to drink, but had entirely conquered the vice. one day a mad
whim seized her to put his self-mastery and her power over him to the
test. as it happened to be his birthday, she rolled into his study a
small keg of brandy, and then withdrew. she returned some time after
wards to find that he had broached the keg, and lay insensible on the
floor. in this anecdote we cannot but recognise the germ, not only of
hedda's temptation of lovborg, but of a large part of her character.

"thus," says dr. brandes, "out of small and scattered traits of reality
ibsen fashioned his close-knit and profoundly thought-out works of art."

for the character of eilert lovborg, again, ibsen seem unquestionably
to have borrowed several traits from a definite original. a young danish
man of letters, whom dr. brandes calls holm, was an enthusiastic admirer
of ibsen, and came to be on very friendly terms with him. one day ibsen
was astonished to receive, in munich, a parcel addressed from berlin by
this young man, containing, without a word of explanation, a packet of
his (ibsen's) letters, and a photograph which he had presented to holm.
ibsen brooded and brooded over the incident, and at last came to the
conclusion that the young man had intended to return her letters and
photograph to a young lady to whom he was known to be attached, and had
in a fit of aberration mixed up the two objects of his worship. some
time after, holm appeared at ibsen's rooms. he talked quite rationally,
but professed to have no knowledge whatever of the letter-incident,
though he admitted the truth of ibsen's conjecture that the "belle dame
sans merci" had demanded the return of her letters and portrait. ibsen
was determined to get at the root of the mystery; and a little inquiry
into his young friend's habits revealed the fact that he broke his fast
on a bottle of port wine, consumed a bottle of rhine wine at lunch, of
burgundy at dinner, and finished off the evening with one or two more
bottles of port. then he heard, too, how, in the course of a night's
carouse, holm had lost the manuscript of a book; and in these traits he
saw the outline of the figure of eilert lovborg.

some time elapsed, and again ibsen received a postal packet from holm.
this one contained his will, in which ibsen figured as his residuary
legatee. but many other legatees were mentioned in the instrument--all
of them ladies, such as fraulein alma rothbart, of bremen, and fraulein
elise kraushaar, of berlin. the bequests to these meritorious spinsters
were so generous that their sum considerably exceeded the amount of
the testator's property. ibsen gently but firmly declined the proffered
inheritance; but holm's will no doubt suggested to him the figure of
that red-haired "mademoiselle diana," who is heard of but not seen
in _hedda gabler_, and enabled him to add some further traits to the
portraiture of lovborg. when the play appeared, holm recognised
himself with glee in the character of the bibulous man of letters,
and thereafter adopted "eilert lovborg" as his pseudonym. i do not,
therefore, see why dr. brandes should suppress his real name; but i
willingly imitate him in erring on the side of discretion. the poor
fellow died several years ago.

some critics have been greatly troubled as to the precise meaning of
hedda's fantastic vision of lovborg "with vine-leaves in his hair."
surely this is a very obvious image or symbol of the beautiful, the
ideal, aspect of bacchic elation and revelry. antique art, or i am much
mistaken, shows us many figures of dionysus himself and his followers
with vine-leaves entwined their hair. to ibsen's mind, at any rate, the
image had long been familiar. in _peer gynt_ (act iv. sc. 8), when peer,
having carried off anitra, finds himself in a particularly festive mood,
he cries: "were there vine-leaves around, i would garland my brow."
again, in _emperor and galilean_ (pt. ii. act 1) where julian, in the
procession of dionysus, impersonates the god himself, it is directed
that he shall wear a wreath of vine-leaves. professor dietrichson
relates that among the young artists whose society ibsen frequented
during his first years in rome, it was customary, at their little
festivals, for the revellers to deck themselves in this fashion. but the
image is so obvious that there is no need to trace it to any personal
experience. the attempt to place hedda's vine-leaves among ibsen's
obscurities is an example of the firm resolution not to understand which
animated the criticism of the 'nineties.

dr. brandes has dealt very severely with the character of eilert
lovborg, alleging that we cannot believe in the genius attributed to
him. but where is he described as a genius? the poet represents him as a
very able student of sociology; but that is quite a different thing from
attributing to him such genius as must necessarily shine forth in every
word he utters. dr. brandes, indeed, declines to believe even in his
ability as a sociologist, on the ground that it is idle to write about
the social development of the future. "to our prosaic minds," he says,
"it may seem as if the most sensible utterance on the subject is that of
the fool of the play: 'the future! good heavens, we know nothing of the
future.'" the best retort to this criticism is that which eilert himself
makes: "there's a thing or two to be said about it all the same." the
intelligent forecasting of the future (as mr. h. g. wells has shown)
is not only clearly distinguishable from fantastic utopianism, but is
indispensable to any large statesmanship or enlightened social activity.
with very real and very great respect for dr. brandes, i cannot think
that he has been fortunate in his treatment of lovborg's character.
it has been represented as an absurdity that he would think of reading
abstracts from his new book to a man like tesman, whom he despises. but
though tesman is a ninny, he is, as hedda says, a "specialist"--he is a
competent, plodding student of his subject. lovborg may quite naturally
wish to see how his new method, or his excursion into a new field,
strikes the average scholar of the tesman type. he is, in fact, "trying
it on the dog"--neither an unreasonable nor an unusual proceeding. there
is, no doubt, a certain improbability in the way in which lovborg is
represented as carrying his manuscript around, and especially in mrs.
elvsted's production of his rough draft from her pocket; but these are
mechanical trifles, on which only a niggling criticism would dream of
laying stress.

of all ibsen's works, _hedda gabler_ is the most detached, the most
objective--a character-study pure and simple. it is impossible--or so
it seems to me--to extract any sort of general idea from it. one cannot
even call it a satire, unless one is prepared to apply that term to the
record of a "case" in a work of criminology. reverting to dumas's dictum
that a play should contain "a painting, a judgment, an ideal," we may
say the _hedda gabler_ fulfils only the first of these requirements. the
poet does not even pass judgment on his heroine: he simply paints her
full-length portrait with scientific impassivity. but what a portrait!
how searching in insight, how brilliant in colouring, how rich in
detail! grant allen's remark, above quoted, was, of course, a whimsical
exaggeration; the hedda type is not so common as all that, else the
world would quickly come to an end. but particular traits and tendencies
of the hedda type are very common in modern life, and not only among
women. hyperaesthesia lies at the root of her tragedy. with a keenly
critical, relentlessly solvent intelligence, she combines a morbid
shrinking from all the gross and prosaic detail of the sensual life.
she has nothing to take her out of herself--not a single intellectual
interest or moral enthusiasm. she cherishes, in a languid way, a petty
social ambition; and even that she finds obstructed and baffled. at the
same time she learns that another woman has had the courage to love and
venture all, where she, in her cowardice, only hankered and refrained.
her malign egoism rises up uncontrolled, and calls to its aid her quick
and subtle intellect. she ruins the other woman's happiness, but in
doing so incurs a danger from which her sense of personal dignity
revolts. life has no such charm for her that she cares to purchase it at
the cost of squalid humiliation and self-contempt. the good and the bad
in her alike impel her to have done with it all; and a pistol-shot
ends what is surely one of the most poignant character-tragedies in
literature. ibsen's brain never worked at higher pressure than in the
conception and adjustment of those "crowded hours" in which hedda,
tangled in the web of will and circumstance, struggles on till she is
too weary to struggle any more.

it may not be superfluous to note that the "a" in "gabler" should be
sounded long and full, like the "a" in "garden"--not like the "a" in
"gable" or in "gabble."


w. a.