


[CHARACTER]
if gatsby represents one part of fitzgerald's personality,
the flashy celebrity who pursued and glorified wealth in order to
impress the woman he loved, then nick represents another part: the
quiet, reflective midwesterner adrift in the lurid east. a young
man (he turns thirty during the course of the novel) from minnesota,
nick travels to new york in 1922 to learn
the bond business. he lives in the west egg district of long island,
next door to gatsby. nick is also daisy's cousin, which enables
him to observe and assist the resurgent love affair between daisy
and gatsby. as a result of his relationship to these two characters,
nick is the perfect choice to narrate the novel, which functions
as a personal memoir of his experiences with gatsby in the summer
of 1922.

nick is also well suited to narrating the great
gatsby because of his temperament. as he tells the reader
in chapter 1, he is tolerant, open-minded, quiet, and a good listener,
and, as a result, others tend to talk to him and tell him their
secrets. gatsby, in particular, comes to trust him and treat him
as a confidant. nick generally assumes a secondary role throughout
the novel, preferring to describe and comment on events rather than
dominate the action. often, however, he functions as fitzgerald's
voice, as in his extended meditation on time and the american dream
at the end of chapter 9.
insofar as nick plays a role inside the narrative, he
evidences a strongly mixed reaction to life on the east coast, one
that creates a powerful internal conflict that he does not resolve
until the end of the book. on the one hand, nick is attracted to
the fast-paced, fun-driven lifestyle of new york. on the
other hand, he finds that lifestyle grotesque and damaging. this
inner conflict is symbolized throughout the book by nick's romantic
affair with jordan baker. he is attracted to her vivacity and her
sophistication just as he is repelled by her dishonesty and her
lack of consideration for other people.
nick states that there is a "quality of distortion" to
life in new york, and this lifestyle makes him lose his
equilibrium, especially early in the novel, as when he gets drunk
at gatsby's party in chapter 2. after witnessing the unraveling
of gatsby's dream and presiding over the appalling spectacle of
gatsby's funeral, nick realizes that the fast life of revelry on
the east coast is a cover for the terrifying moral emptiness that
the valley of ashes symbolizes. having gained the maturity that
this insight demonstrates, he returns to minnesota in search of
a quieter life structured by more traditional moral values.
