


[CHARACTER]
the title character of the great gatsby is
a young man, around thirty years old, who rose from an impoverished
childhood in rural north dakota to become fabulously wealthy. however,
he achieved this lofty goal by participating in organized crime,
including distributing illegal alcohol and trading in stolen securities.
from his early youth, gatsby despised poverty and longed for wealth
and sophistication--he dropped out of st. olaf's college after only
two weeks because he could not bear the janitorial job with which
he was paying his tuition. though gatsby has always wanted to be
rich, his main motivation in acquiring his fortune was his love
for daisy buchanan, whom he met as a young military officer in louisville before
leaving to fight in world war i in 1917.
gatsby immediately fell in love with daisy's aura of luxury, grace,
and charm, and lied to her about his own background in order to
convince her that he was good enough for her. daisy promised to
wait for him when he left for the war, but married tom buchanan
in 1919, while gatsby was studying at oxford
after the war in an attempt to gain an education. from that moment
on, gatsby dedicated himself to winning daisy back, and his acquisition
of millions of dollars, his purchase of a gaudy mansion on west
egg, and his lavish weekly parties are all merely means to that
end.

fitzgerald delays the introduction of most of this information until
fairly late in the novel. gatsby's reputation precedes him--gatsby
himself does not appear in a speaking role until chapter 3. fitzgerald
initially presents gatsby as the aloof, enigmatic host of the unbelievably
opulent parties thrown every week at his mansion. he appears surrounded
by spectacular luxury, courted by powerful men and beautiful women.
he is the subject of a whirlwind of gossip throughout new york and
is already a kind of legendary celebrity before he is ever introduced
to the reader. fitzgerald propels the novel forward through the
early chapters by shrouding gatsby's background and the source of
his wealth in mystery (the reader learns about gatsby's childhood
in chapter 6 and receives definitive proof of his criminal dealings
in chapter 7). as a result, the reader's first, distant impressions
of gatsby strike quite a different note from that of the lovesick,
naive young man who emerges during the later part of the novel.
fitzgerald uses this technique of delayed character revelation
to emphasize the theatrical quality of gatsby's approach to life,
which is an important part of his personality. gatsby has literally
created his own character, even changing his name from james gatz
to [CHARACTER] to represent his reinvention of himself. as his relentless quest
for daisy demonstrates, gatsby has an extraordinary ability to transform
his hopes and dreams into reality; at the beginning of the novel,
he appears to the reader just as he desires to appear to the world.
this talent for self-invention is what gives gatsby his quality of
"greatness": indeed, the title "the great gatsby"
is reminiscent of billings for such vaudeville magicians as "the
great houdini" and "the great blackstone," suggesting that the persona
of [CHARACTER] is a masterful illusion.

gatsby believed in the green light, the
orgastic future that year by year recedes before us.
(see important quotations explained)

as the novel progresses and fitzgerald deconstructs gatsby's
self-presentation, gatsby reveals himself to be an innocent, hopeful young
man who stakes everything on his dreams, not realizing that his
dreams are unworthy of him. gatsby invests daisy with an idealistic
perfection that she cannot possibly attain in reality and pursues
her with a passionate zeal that blinds him to her limitations. his dream
of her disintegrates, revealing the corruption that wealth causes
and the unworthiness of the goal, much in the way fitzgerald sees
the american dream crumbling in the 1920s,
as america's powerful optimism, vitality, and individualism become
subordinated to the amoral pursuit of wealth.
gatsby is contrasted most consistently with nick. critics
point out that the former, passionate and active, and the latter,
sober and reflective, seem to represent two sides of fitzgerald's
personality. additionally, whereas tom is a cold-hearted, aristocratic
bully, gatsby is a loyal and good-hearted man. though his lifestyle
and attitude differ greatly from those of george wilson, gatsby
and wilson share the fact that they both lose their love interest
to tom.
