


[CHARACTER] 
as [CHARACTER] matures during the year that makes up the
house on mango street, she experiences a series of awakenings,
the most important being a sexual awakening. at the beginning of
the novel, [CHARACTER] is not quite ready to emerge from the asexuality
of childhood. she is completely ignorant about sex and says that
boys and girls live in completely different worlds. she is so much
a child that she cannot even speak to her brothers outside of the
house. when she becomes an adolescent, she begins to experiment
with the power she, as a young woman, has over men. marin teaches
her fundamental facts about boys, but the first major step in [CHARACTER]'s
awareness of her sexuality is when she and her friends explore the neighborhood
in high-heeled shoes. she relishes the power the shoes seem to give
her, and she plays with the idea that physical beauty could help
her escape the squalor of her surroundings. [CHARACTER] quickly learns,
however, that the patriarchal society in which she lives denies
the power of female sexuality. the bum who attempts to kiss rachel
is the first in a series of men who will use force to take what
girls don't want to give freely. after being sexually assaulted, [CHARACTER]
decides to try to forget some of what she has learned about sex
in the past year in order to focus on writing. by the end of the
novel, [CHARACTER]'s views on sex have evolved, and she rejects sex as
a means of escape. 

[CHARACTER]'s moral sense develops from an intense individualism to
a feeling of responsibility toward the people in her community.
as a child, [CHARACTER] wants only to escape mango street. her dreams of
self-definition don't include the fact that she has any responsibility
to her family or to the people around her, and she wishes to leave them
all behind. once [CHARACTER] has become familiar with the people in
her neighborhood, however, she begins to feel affection and, ultimately,
responsibility for them. she no longer sees herself as an individual
striving for self-determination. instead, she recognizes herself
as a member of a social network who must give back to her community
in order to break the cycle of poverty that plagues the neighborhood.
[CHARACTER] also develops feelings of moral responsibility toward
her community of women. her negative experiences as sally's friend
show that she has the courage to try to help her friends, even if
they do not always understand that they need to help her as well.
not until she talks with the three sisters and alicia, however,
does [CHARACTER] understand that helping the neighborhood women will
be a lifelong effort.
[CHARACTER]'s final and most important awakening is her
realization of her writing ability, which gives her the means to
escape from mango street. because [CHARACTER] is a writer, she is
a keen observer, and we see her powers of observation mature. she
is present in all of the early stories she narrates, but by the
middle of the novel she is able to narrate stories based wholly
on observation of the people around her. this change shows that
she is becoming an artist, and also that she is becoming more detached
from her neighborhood, since she does not always see herself in
the stories she tells. by the end of the house on mango
street, she knows she has become more detached from her
home through her writing. although she has not yet found a home
of her own, her writing has helped her to find privacy within herself. 
