


[CHARACTER]
ellison uses [CHARACTER], the leader of the
brotherhood, to point out the failure of abstract ideologies to
address the real plight of african americans and other victims of
oppression. at first, jack seems kind, compassionate, intelligent,
and helpful, a real boon to the struggling narrator, to whom he
gives money, a job, and--seemingly--a way to help his people fight
against prejudice. but as the story progresses, it becomes clear
that the narrator is just as invisible to jack as he is to everyone
else. jack sees him not as a person but as a tool for the advancement
of the brotherhood's goals. it eventually becomes clear to the narrator
that jack shares the same racial prejudices as the rest of white
american society, and, when the brotherhood's focus changes, jack
abandons the black community without regret.

the narrator's discovery that jack has a glass eye occurs
as jack enters into a fierce tirade on the aims of the brotherhood.
his literal blindness thus symbolizes how his unwavering commitment
to the brotherhood's ideology has blinded him, metaphorically, to
the plight of blacks. he tells the narrator, "we do not shape our
policies to the mistaken and infantile notions of the man in the
street. our job is not to ask them what they think but to tell them!"
throughout the book, jack explains the brotherhood's goals in terms
of an abstract ideology. he tells the narrator in chapter 14 that the group works "for a better world for all people" and that
the organization is striving to remedy the effects of too many people
being "dispossessed of their heritage." he and the other brothers
attempt to make the narrator's own speeches more scientific, injecting
them with abstractions and jargon in order to distance them from
the hard realities that the narrator seeks to expose.
to many black intellectuals in the 1930s,
including ellison, the communist party in particular seemed to offer
the kind of salvation that jack appears to embody--only to betray
and discard the african-american cause as the party's focus shifted
in the early 1940s. ellison's treatment of
the brotherhood is largely a critique of the poor treatment that
he believed the black community had received from communism, and
jack, with his red hair, seems to symbolize this betrayal.
