


Virgil
The only character besides Dante to appear all the way
through Inferno, Virgil's ghost is generally taken
by critics to represent human reason, which guides and protects
the individual (represented by Dante/Everyman) through the world
of sin. As befits a character who symbolizes reason, Virgil proves
sober, measured, resolute, and wise. He repeatedly protects Dante
from hostile demons and monsters, from Charon to the Centaurs; when
he appears powerless outside the gates of the city of Dis in Canto
VIII, his helplessness appears very ominous, signifying that Lower
Hell offers far darker dangers than Upper Hell. Virgil's reliance
on the angelic messenger in this scene also symbolizes the fact
that reason is powerless without faith--an important tenet of Dante's
moral philosophy and one that marks Inferno as
a Christian poem, distinct from the classical epics that preceded
it. In the fullest sense of the word, Virgil acts as Dante's guide,
showing him not only the physical route through Hell but also reinforcing
its moral lessons. When Dante appears slow to learn these lessons--such
as when he sympathizes with sinners or attempts to remain too long
in one region of Hell--Virgil often grows impatient with him, a trait
that humanizes this otherwise impersonal shade.
Dante the character and Dante the poet seem to regard
Virgil differently. Dante the character regards Virgil as his master,
constantly swearing his admiration for, and trust in, him. Dante
the poet, however, often makes use of Inferno to prove his own poetic
greatness in comparison to the classical bards who preceded him--including Virgil,
who lived more than a thousand years before Dante. In Dante's time,
Virgil, the author of the Aeneid, was considered the greatest of
the Roman poets. As with many of his other classical and mythological
appropriations, Dante's inclusion of Virgil in his poem denotes
both an acknowledgment and appreciation of classical tradition and,
to some degree, a form of bragging on Dante's part: for while he
respects Virgil enough to include him in his work, he also suggests
that his poem subsumes Virgil entirely.
