


King Henry V 
Though a substantial number of scenes focus on other characters, Henry
directly initiates nearly all of the significant action in the play, and
he is without question the play's protagonist and hero. Henry is an
extraordinary figure who possesses a degree of intelligence and charisma
only briefly glimpsed in Shakespeare's two Henry IV plays.
There Henry V appears as a pleasure-seeking teenage prince who wrestles
with his role as an heir to the throne.

	Perhaps Henry V's most remarkable quality is his resolve:
once he has set his mind to accomplishing a goal, he uses every
resource at his disposal to see that it is accomplished. He carefully
presents himself as an unstoppable force to whom others must actively
choose how to react. This tactic may seem morally questionable,
but it is a valuable psychological weapon that Henry uses to pressure
his enemies into doing what he wants. Again and again, Henry acts
in a manner that would be deplorable for a common citizen but that makes
him an exemplary king. For example, Henry often draws criticism
from modern readers for refusing to take responsibility for the
war in France. He even tells the French governor at Harfleur that if
the French do not surrender, they will be responsible for the carnage
that Henry will create.
	Another extraordinary quality Henry possesses is his
facility with language. Henry's rhetorical skill is a forceful weapon,
the strength of which nearly equals that of his army's swords. With words,
Henry can inspire and rouse his followers, intimidate his enemies,
and persuade nearly anyone who hears him. With Henry's speeches,
Shakespeare creates a rhetoric that is, like Henry himself, at once
candidly frank and extremely sophisticated. Henry can be cold and
menacing, as when he speaks to the Dauphin's messenger; he can be
passionate and uplifting, as in his St. Crispin's Day speech; and
he can be gruesomely terrifying, as in his diatribe against the Governor
of Harfleur. In each case, Henry's words suggest that he is merely
speaking his mind at the moment, but these speeches are brilliantly
crafted and work powerfully on the minds of his listeners. Henry
has a very special quality for a king: the ability to present himself
honestly while still manipulating his audience.
	Shakespeare does not comment explicitly on Henry's motives
for invading France, but it seems clear from his speeches about
the weight of his responsibility that Henry is not motivated exclusively by
a lust for power or land. Henry clearly takes the mantle of kingship
very seriously, and he is dedicated to fulfilling the obligations
of his exalted rank. He mourns his inability to sleep the untroubled sleep
of the common man, hardly the behavior of a man dedicated to the
pleasures of power. It also seems clear from Henry's undeniably uplifting
speeches that Shakespeare intends for us to see Henry as a hero,
or, at the very least, as an estimable king. Insofar as Henry is
a hero, he is made so by his commitment to his responsibilities
above his own personal feelings. Along with his faculty of resolve,
this commitment makes him the king he is; though it sometimes causes him
to make questionable personal decisions, it also helps to mitigate
the effect of those decisions in our eyes.
