


Catherine 
The young, pretty princess of France does not play a very
active role in the progress of the narrative, but she is nevertheless
significant because she typifies the role played by women in this
extremely masculine play. The scenes that center on Catherine and
her tutor, Alice, depict a female world that contrasts starkly with
the grim, violent world in which the play's men exist. While the
men fight pitched battles, yoking the course of history to the course
of their bloody conflicts, Catherine lives in a much gentler and
quieter milieu, generally ignorant of the larger struggle going
on around her. She fills her days mainly with laughing and teasing
Alice as the latter attempts to teach her English.
	The fact that Catherine's scenes are in a different language
from the rest of the play's scenes dramatically underscores the
difference between her lifestyle and that of the men: where the
soldiers speak a hard, rhythmic English, Catherine speaks in a soft,
lilting French. These differences point to the fact that, while
Catherine's life may be more pleasant than that of the men, the
scope of her existence is extremely limited and has been chosen
for her: she has become beautiful, pleasant, and yielding because
she has been raised to become whatever will make her desirable to
a future husband. These qualities have been determined by the masculine
value system around which her culture is structured.

	Catherine's father hopes to marry her to a powerful leader
in order to win a powerful ally, and thus Catherine has been molded into
the graceful and charming woman that a powerful leader is likely
to want. Shakespeare uses Catherine's English lessons with Alice
to highlight her role as a tool of negotiation among the men. As
the English conquer more and more of France, Catherine's potential
husband seems likely to be English. Catherine thus begins to study
English--not because she herself desires to speak the language (we
are given almost no insight into what Catherine herself might desire),
but because her father intends to marry her to his enemy in order
to end the war and preserve his power in France.
