


[CHARACTER]
christopher's defining characteristic is his inability to imagine the thoughts
                and feelings of other people. in other words, he cannot empathize. because he cannot
                imagine what another person is thinking, he cannot tell when a person speaks
                sarcastically, or determine a person's mood by his facial expression. this inability
                to empathize is one of the most prominent features of autism-related disorders, and
                this characteristic as well as a few others--christopher's difficulty understanding
                metaphors, his fixation on certain topics, and his computer-like ability with
                numbers--strongly suggest that christopher has a mild form of autism. this condition
                has made him extraordinarily gifted in math and science but severely underequipped
                socially, leading christopher to frequently misunderstand other people, especially
                his father. as a result, he greatly dislikes social interaction and avoids it when
                possible.

although christopher does not mention autism by name anywhere in the novel, we
                see that he recognizes the ways he differs from most people and feels keenly aware
                of these differences. he says, for instance, that although most people enjoy
                chatting, he hates it because he finds it pointless. he doesn't see social
                interaction as an end in itself, thus talking to another person about an unimportant
                topic serves no purpose. he lives as an outsider as a result. he has very few
                friends and doesn't trust other people. he feels content to read in his room by
                himself, and he even fantasizes about being the only person alive on the planet.
                christopher also recognizes and takes pride in the strengths that result from his
                condition, such as his talent for math and his remarkably accurate memory. his
                memory allows him to recall an entire event in extraordinary detail, and he uses it
                to navigate social interactions by memorizing a chart of facial expressions and the
                emotions associated with them.
christopher shows a growing desire for independence throughout the novel, and
                through much of the novel we watch as christopher gains the confidence to assert
                himself. he shows his yearning for independence in a few ways, rebelling against his
                father by disobeying his orders, for instance, and fantasizing about doing whatever
                he likes and taking care of himself in his recurring dream of being one of the few
                people left on earth. he also begins planning to go to college, and to live on his
                own there. as christopher overcomes the various trials he faces, he gains confidence
                in his abilities and gradually becomes more self-sufficient. this process culminates
                in a difficult journey to london that christopher undertakes by himself, a feat that
                represents a significant triumph for him since he has never traveled by himself. at
                the end of the novel, christopher feels he has overcome his challenges, and he feels
                ready to be on his own.
