 
 

the curious incident of the dog in the night-time 

 

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)

 
 

eversion 3.0 - click for inside flap / scan notes  

 
 

 

published by doubleday  
a division of random house,inc.  

 

doubleday and the portrayal of an anchor  

with a dolphin are registered trademarks of random house, inc.  

 

this book is a work of fiction. names, characters, businesses, organizations,  

places, events, and incidents either are the product of the author's  

imagination or are used fictitiously. any resemblance to actual persons,  

living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.  

 

book design by maria carella  

 

underground logo, fabric designs, and line diagrams are reproduced with the  

kind permission of transport for london. kuoni advertisement reproduced with  

the kind permission of kuoni travel ltd. a-level maths question reproduced  

with the kind permission of oxford cambridge and rsa examinations (ocr). every  

effort has been made to trace other copyright holders, and the publishers will  

be happy to correct mistakes or omissions in future editions.  

 

library of congress cataloging-in-publication data  

haddon, mark.  

the curious incident of the dog in the night-time :  

a novel / mark haddon. -- 1st ed. p. cm.  

despite his overwhelming fear of interacting with people, christopher,  

a mathematically gifted, autistic fifteen-year-old boy, decides to  
investigate the murder of a neighbor's dog and uncovers secret  

information about his mother.  

[1. autism -- fiction. 2. savants (savant syndrome) -- fiction.  

3. england -- fiction.]  

i. title.  

pz7.h1165 cu 2003 [fie] -- dc21 2002031355  

 

isbn 0-385-50945-6  

 

copyright © 2002 by mark haddon  

all rights reserved  

 

printed in the united states of america  

 

july 2003  

first edition  

 

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  

www.kevinwood.blogfa.com 

 

 

 

 
 
this book is dedicated to  
sos  
with thanks to  
kathryn heyman, clare alexander,  
kate shaw and dave cohen  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2: 

 

it was 7 minutes after midnight. the dog was lying on the grass in the middle of the lawn in front of mrs. 
shears's house. its eyes were closed. it looked as if it was running on its side, the way dogs run when they 
think they are chasing a cat in a dream. but the dog was not running or asleep. the dog was dead. there 
was a garden fork sticking out of the dog. the points of the fork must have gone all the way through the 
dog and into the ground because the fork had not fallen over. i decided that the dog was probably killed 
with the fork because i could not see any other wounds in the dog and i do not think you would stick a 
garden fork into a dog after it had died for some other reason, like cancer, for example, or a road accident. 
but i could not be certain about this. 
 
i went through mrs. shears's gate, closing it behind me. i walked onto her lawn and knelt beside the dog. 
i put my hand on the muzzle of the dog. it was still warm. 
 
the dog was called wellington. it belonged to mrs. shears, who was our friend. she lived on the opposite 
side of the road, two houses to the left. 
 
wellington was a poodle. not one of the small poodles that have hairstyles but a big poodle. it had curly 
black fur, but when you got close you could see that the skin underneath the fur was a very pale yellow, 
like chicken. 
 
i stroked wellington and wondered who had killed him, and why. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3: 

 
my name is christopher john francis boone. i know all the countries of the world and their capital cities 
and every prime number up to 7,057. 
 
eight years ago, when i first met siobhan, she showed me this picture  
 

 
 
and i knew that it meant "sad," which is what i felt when i found the dead dog.  
 
then she showed me this picture  

 

 
 
and i knew that it meant "happy," like when i'm reading about the apollo space missions, or when i am 
still awake at 3 a.m. or 4 a.m. in the morning and i can walk up and down the street and pretend that i am 
the only person in the whole world.  
 

 

then she drew some other pictures  

 

 
 
but i was unable to say what these meant.  
 
i  got  siobhan  to  draw  lots  of  these  faces  and  then  write  down  next  to  them  exactly what  they meant.  i 
kept the piece of paper in my pocket and took it out when i didn't understand what someone was saying. 
but  it  was  very  difficult  to  decide  which  of  the  diagrams  was  most  like  the  face  they  were  making 
because people's faces move very quickly. 
 
when  i  told  siobhan  that  i  was  doing  this,  she  got  out  a  pencil  and  another  piece  of  paper  and  said  it 
probably made people feel very  
 

 
 

 

and then she laughed. so i tore the original piece of paper up and threw it away. and siobhan apologized. 
and now if i don't know what someone is saying, i ask them what they mean or i walk away.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5: 
 

i pulled the fork out of the dog and lifted him into my arms and hugged him. he was leaking blood from 
the fork holes. 
 
i  like  dogs.  you  always  know  what  a  dog  is  thinking.  it  has  four  moods.  happy,  sad,  cross  and 
concentrating. also, dogs are faithful and they do not tell lies because they cannot talk. 
 
i  had  been  hugging  the  dog  for  4  minutes  when  i  heard  screaming.  i  looked  up  and  saw  mrs.  shears 
running toward me from the patio. she was wearing pajamas and a housecoat. her toenails were painted 
bright pink and she had no shoes on. 
 
she was shouting, "what in fuck's name have you done to my dog?" 
 
i do not like people shouting at me. it makes me scared that they are going to hit me or touch me and i do 
not know what is going to happen. 
 
"let go of the dog," she shouted. "let go of the fucking dog for christ's sake." 
 
i put the dog down on the lawn and moved back 2 meters. 
 
she  bent  down. i  thought  she was  going  to  pick  the  dog  up  herself,  but  she  didn't.  perhaps  she  noticed 
how much blood there was and didn't want to get dirty. instead she started screaming again. 
 
i  put  my  hands  over  my  ears  and  closed  my  eyes  and  rolled  forward  till  i  was  hunched  up  with  my 
forehead pressed onto the grass. the grass was wet and cold. it was nice. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7: 

 
this is a murder mystery novel. 
 
siobhan  said  that  i  should  write  something  i  would  want  to  read  myself.  mostly  i  read  books  about 
science and maths. i do not like proper novels. in proper novels people say things like, "i am veined with 
iron, with silver and with streaks of common mud. i cannot contract into the firm fist which those clench 
who  do  not  depend  on  stimulus."  1  what  does  this  mean?  i  do  not  know.  nor  does  father.  nor  does 
siobhan or mr. jeavons. i have asked them. 
 
siobhan has long blond hair and wears glasses which are made of green plastic. and mr. jeavons smells 
of soap and wears brown shoes that have approximately 60 tiny circular holes in each of them. 
 
but i do like murder mystery novels. so i am writing a murder mystery novel. 
 
in  a  murder  mystery  novel  someone  has  to  work  out  who  the  murderer  is  and  then  catch  them.  it  is  a 
puzzle. if it is a good puzzle you can sometimes work out the answer before the end of the book. 
 
siobhan said that the book should begin with something to grab people's attention. that is why i started 
with the dog. i also started with the dog because it happened to me and i find it hard to imagine things 
which did not happen to me. 
 
siobhan  read  the  first  page  and  said  that  it  was  different.  she  put  this  word  into  inverted  commas  by 
making  the  wiggly  quotation  sign  with  her  first  and  second  fingers.  she  said  that  it  was  usually  people 
who  were  killed  in  murder  mystery  novels.  i  said  that  two  dogs  were  killed  in  the  hound  of  the 
baskervilles, the hound itself and james mortimer's spaniel, but siobhan said they weren't the victims of 
the murder, sir charles baskerville was. she said that this was because readers cared more about people 
than dogs, so if a person was killed in a book, readers would want to carry on reading. 
 
i said that i wanted to write about something real and i knew people who had died but i did not know any 
people  who  had  been  killed,  except  mr.  paulson,  edward's  father  from  school,  and  that  was  a  gliding 
accident, not murder, and i didn't really know him. i also said that i cared about dogs because they were 
faithful  and  honest,  and  some  dogs  were  cleverer  and  more  interesting  than  some  people.  steve,  for 
example, who comes to the school on thursdays, needs help to eat his food and could not even fetch a 
stick. siobhan asked me not to say this to steve's mother. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11: 

 
then the police arrived. i like the police. they have uniforms and numbers and you know what they are 
meant to be doing. there was a policewoman and a policeman. the policewoman had a little hole in her 
tights on her left ankle and a red scratch in the middle of the hole. the policeman had a big orange leaf 
stuck to the bottom of his shoe which was poking out from one side. 
 
the policewoman put her arms round mrs. shears and led her back toward the house. 
 
i lifted my head off the grass. 
 
the  policeman  squatted  down  beside  me  and  said,  "would  you  like  to  tell  me  what's  going  on  here, 
young man?" 
 
i sat up and said, "the dog is dead." 
 
"i'd got that far," he said. 
 
i said, "i think someone killed the dog." 
 
"how old are you?" he asked. 
 
i replied, "i am 15 years and 3 months and 2 days." 
 
"and what, precisely, were you doing in the garden?" he asked. 
 
"i was holding the dog," i replied. 
 
"and why were you holding the dog?" he asked. 
 
this was a difficult question. it was something i wanted to do. i like dogs. it made me sad to see that the 
dog was dead. 
 
i like policemen, too, and i wanted to answer the question properly, but the policeman did not give  me 
enough time to work out the correct answer. 
 
"why were you holding the dog?" he asked again. 
 
"i like dogs," i said. 
 
"did you kill the dog?" he asked. 
 
i said, "i did not kill the dog." 
 
"is this your fork?" he asked. 
 
i said, "no." 
 
"you seem very upset about this," he said. 
 
he  was  asking  too  many  questions  and  he  was  asking  them  too  quickly.  they  were  stacking  up  in  my 
head  like  loaves  in  the  factory  where  uncle  terry  works.  the  factory  is  a  bakery  and  he  operates  the 
slicing  machines.  and  sometimes  a  slicer  is  not  working  fast  enough  but  the  bread  keeps  coming  and 

there  is  a  blockage.  i  sometimes  think  of  my  mind  as  a  machine,  but  not  always  as  a  bread-slicing 
machine. it makes it easier to explain to other people what is going on inside it. 
 
the policeman said, "i am going to ask you once again. . ." 
 
i rolled back onto the lawn and pressed my forehead to the ground again and made the noise that father 
calls  groaning.  i  make  this  noise  when  there  is  too  much  information  coming  into  my  head  from  the 
outside  world.  it  is  like  when  you  are  upset  and  you  hold  the  radio  against  your  ear  and  you  tune  it 
halfway between two stations so that all you get is white noise and then you turn the volume right up so 
that this is all you can hear and then you know you are safe because you cannot hear anything else. 
 
the policeman took hold of my arm and lifted me onto my feet. 
 
i didn't like him touching me like this. 
 
and this is when i hit him. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
this will not be a funny book. i cannot tell jokes because i do not understand them. here is a joke, as an 
example. it is one of father's. 

13: 

his face was drawn but the curtains were real. 

i know why this is meant to be funny. i asked. it is because drawn has three meanings, and they are (1) 
drawn with a pencil, (2) exhausted, and (3) pulled across a window, and meaning 1 refers to both the face 
and the curtains, meaning 2 refers only to the face, and meaning 3 refers only to the curtains. 

if i try to say the joke to myself, making the word mean the three different things at the same time, it is 
like hearing three different pieces of music at the same time, which is uncomfortable and confusing and 
not  nice  like  white  noise.  it  is  like  three  people  trying  to  talk  to  you  at  the  same  time  about  different 
things. 

and that is why there are no jokes in this book. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17: 

the  policeman  looked  at  me  for  a  while  without  speaking.  then  he  said,  "i  am  arresting  you  for 
assaulting a police officer." 
 
this made me feel a lot calmer because it is what policemen say on television and in films. 
 
then he said, "i strongly advise you to get into the back of the police car, because if you try any of that 
monkey business again, you little shit, i will seriously lose my rag. is that understood?" 
 
i walked over to the police car, which was parked just outside the gate. he opened the back door and i got 
inside. he climbed into the driver's seat and made a call on his radio to the policewoman, who was still 
inside the house. he said, "the little bugger just had a pop at  me, kate. can you hang on with mrs. s. 
while i drop him off at the station? i'll get tony to swing by and pick you up." 
 
and she said, "sure. i'll catch you later." 
 
the policeman said, "okeydoke," and we drove off. 
 
the police car smelled of hot plastic and aftershave and take-away chips. 
 
i watched the sky as we drove toward the town center. it was a clear night and you could see the milky 
way. 
 
some people think the milky way is a long line of stars, but it isn't. our galaxy is a huge disk of stars 
millions of light-years across, and the solar system is somewhere near the outside edge of the disk. 
 
when you look in direction a, at 90° to the disk, you don't see many stars. but when you look in direction 
b,  you  see  lots  more  stars  because  you  are  looking  into  the  main  body  of  the  galaxy,  and  because  the 
galaxy is a disk you see a stripe of stars. 
 

 

 
 
and then i thought about how for a long time scientists were puzzled by the fact that the sky is dark at 
night, even though there are billions of stars in the universe and there must be stars in every direction you 
look, so that the sky should be full of starlight because there is very little in the way to stop the light from 
reaching earth. 
 
then  they  worked  out  that  the  universe  was  expanding,  that  the  stars  were  all  rushing  away  from  one 
another after the big bang, and the further the stars were away from us the faster they were moving, some 
of them nearly as fast as the speed of light, which was why their light never reached us. 
 
i like this fact. it is something you can work out in your own mind just by looking at the sky above your 
head at night and thinking without having to ask anyone. 
 

and  when  the  universe  has  finished  exploding,  all  the  stars  will  slow  down,  like  a  ball  that  has  been 
thrown into the  air, and  they will  come  to a halt and they will all begin to fall toward the  center of the 
universe again. and then there will be nothing to stop us from seeing all the stars in the world because 
they will all be moving toward us, gradually faster and faster, and we will know that the world is going to 
end soon because when we look up into the sky at night there will be no darkness, just the blazing light of 
billions and billions of stars, all falling. 
 
except  that  no  one  will  see  this  because  there  will  be  no  people  left  on  the  earth  to  see  it.  they  will 
probably have become extinct by then. and even if there are people still in existence, they will not see it 
because  the  light  will  be  so  bright  and  hot  that  everyone  will  be  burned  to  death,  even  if  they  live  in 
tunnels. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19: 

chapters in books are usually given the cardinal numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and so on. but i have decided to 
give my chapters prime numbers 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13 and so on because i like prime numbers. 
 
this is how you work out what prime numbers are. 
 
first you write down all the positive whole numbers in the world. 
 

 
then you take away all the numbers that are multiples of 2. then you take away all the numbers that are 
multiples of 3. then you take away all the numbers that are multiples of 4 and 5 and 6 and 7 and so on. 
 
the numbers that are left are the prime numbers. 
 

 

 

 
the  rule  for  working  out  prime  numbers  is  really  simple,  but  no  one  has  ever  worked  out  a  simple 
formula for telling you whether a very big number is a prime number or what the next one will be. if a 
number is really, really big, it can take a computer years to work out whether it is a prime number. 
 
prime numbers are useful for writing codes and in america they are classed as military material and if 
you  find  one  over  100  digits  long  you  have  to  tell  the  cia  and  they  buy  it  off  you  for  $10,000.  but  it 
would not be a very good way of making a living. 
 
prime numbers are what is left when you have taken all the patterns away. i think prime numbers are like 
life. they are very logical but you could never work out the rules, even if you spent all your time thinking 
about them. 
 

23: 

 
when i got to the police station they made me take the laces out of my shoes and empty my pockets at the 
front desk in case i had anything in them that i could use to kill myself or escape or attack a policeman 
with. 
 
the sergeant behind the desk had very hairy hands and he had bitten his nails so much that they had bled. 
this is what i had in my pockets 

1.  a swiss army knife with 15 attachments including a wire stripper and a saw and a toothpick and 

tweezers  

2.  a piece of string  
3.  a piece of a wooden puzzle which looked like this  

 

 

4.  3 pellets of rat food for toby, my rat  
5.  £1.47 (this was made up of a £1 coin, a 20p coin, two l0p coins, a 5p coin and a 2p coin)  
6.  a red paper clip  
7.  a key for the front door  

i was also wearing my watch and they wanted me to leave this at the desk as well but i said that i needed 
to keep my watch on because i needed to know exactly what time it was. and when they tried to take it 
off me i screamed, so they let me keep it on. 
 
they asked me if i had any family. i said i did. they asked me who my family was. i said it was father, 
but mother was dead. and i said it was also uncle terry, but he was in sunderland and he was father's 
brother,  and  it  was  my  grandparents,  too,  but  three  of  them  were  dead  and  grandma  burton  was  in  a 
home because she had senile dementia and thought that i was someone on television. 
 
then they asked me for father's phone number. 
 
i told them that he had two numbers, one for at home and one which was a mobile phone, and i said both 
of them. 
 
it was nice in the police cell. it was almost a perfect cube, 2 meters long by 2 meters wide by 2 meters 
high.  it  contained  approximately  8  cubic  meters  of  air.  it  had  a  small  window  with  bars  and,  on  the 
opposite side, a metal door with a long, thin hatch near the floor for sliding trays of food into the cell and 
a  sliding  hatch  higher  up  so  that  policemen  could  look  in  and  check  that  prisoners  hadn't  escaped  or 
committed suicide. there was also a padded bench. 
 
i  wondered  how  i  would  escape  if  i  was  in  a  story.  it  would  be  difficult  because  the  only  things  i  had 
were my clothes and my shoes, which had no laces in them. 
 
i decided that my best plan would be to wait for a really sunny day and then use my glasses to focus the 
sunlight  on  a  piece  of  my  clothing  and  start  a  fire.  i  would  then  make  my  escape  when  they  saw  the 
smoke and took me out of the cell. and if they didn't notice i would be able to wee on the clothes and put 
them out. 

 
i wondered whether mrs. shears had told the police that i had killed wellington and whether, when the 
police  found  out  that  she  had  lied,  she  would  go  to  prison.  because  telling  lies  about  people  is  called 
slander. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

29: 

 
i find people confusing. 
 
this is for two main reasons. 
 
the first main reason is that people do a lot of talking without using any words. siobhan says that if you 
raise one eyebrow it can mean lots of different things. it can mean "i want to do sex with you" and it can 
also mean "i think that what you just said was very stupid." 
 
siobhan also says that if you close your mouth and breathe out loudly through your nose, it can mean that 
you are relaxed, or that you are bored, or that you are angry, and it all depends on how much air comes 
out of your nose and how fast and what shape your mouth is when you do it and how you are sitting and 
what you said just before and hundreds of other things which are too complicated to work out in a few 
seconds. 
 
the second main reason is that people often talk using metaphors. these are examples of metaphors 

i laughed my socks off. 
he was the apple of her eye. 
they had a skeleton in the cupboard. 
we had a real pig of a day. 
the dog was stone dead. 

 
 
the word metaphor  means carrying something from one place to another, and it comes from the greek 
words (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4) (which means from one place to another) and (cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:8) (which means to carry), and it is when 
you describe something by using a word for something that it isn't. this means that the word metaphor is 
a metaphor. 
 
i think it should be called a lie because a pig is not like a day and people do not have skeletons in their 
cupboards.  and  when  i  try  and  make  a  picture  of  the  phrase  in  my  head  it  just  confuses  me  because 
imagining an apple in someone's eye doesn't have anything to do with liking someone a lot and it makes 
you forget what the person was talking about. 
 
my  name  is  a  metaphor.  it  means  carrying  christ  and  it  comes  from  the  greek  words  (cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:12)  (which 
means  jesus  christ)  and (cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:8)  and  it  was  the  name  given  to  st.  christopher  because  he  carried  jesus 
christ across a river. 
 
this makes you wonder what he was called before he carried christ across the river. but he wasn't called 
anything because this is an apocryphal story, which means that it is a lie, too. 
 
mother used to say that it meant christopher was a nice name because it was a story about being kind and 
helpful,  but  i  do  not  want  my  name  to  mean  a  story  about  being  kind  and  helpful.  i  want  my  name  to 
mean me. 
 

 

 

 

31: 

it was 1:12 a.m. when father arrived at the police station. i did not see him until 1:28 a.m. but i knew he 
was there because i could hear him. 
 
he was shouting, "i want to see my son," and "why the hell is he locked up?" and "of course i'm bloody 
angry." 
 
then i heard a policeman telling him to calm down. then i heard nothing for a long while. 
 
at 1:28 a.m. a policeman opened the door of the cell and told me that there was someone to see me. 
 
i stepped outside. father was standing in the corridor. he held up his right hand and spread his fingers out 
in a fan. i held up my left hand and spread my fingers out in a fan and we made our fingers and thumbs 
touch each other. we do this because sometimes father wants to give me a hug, but i do not like hugging 
people so we do this instead, and it means that he loves me. 
 
then the policeman told us to follow him down the corridor to another room. in the room was a table and 
three chairs. 
 
he told us  to sit down on the far side of the  table  and he sat down on  the other side. there was a tape 
recorder on the table and i asked whether i was going to be interviewed and he was going to record the 
interview. 
 
he said, "i don't think there will be any need for that." 
 
he was an inspector. i could tell because he wasn't wearing a uniform. he also had a very hairy nose. it 
looked as if there were two very small mice hiding in his nostrils.2 
 
he said, "i have spoken to your father and he says that you didn't mean to hit the policeman." 
 
i didn't say anything because this wasn't a question. 
 
he said, "did you mean to hit the policeman?" 
 
i said, "yes." 
 
he squeezed his face and said, "but you didn't mean to hurt the policeman?" 
 
i thought about this and said, "no. i didn't mean to hurt the policeman. i just wanted him to stop touching 
me." 
 
then he said, "you know that it is wrong to hit a policeman, don't you?" 
 
i said, "i do." 
 
he was quiet for a few seconds, then he asked, "did you kill the dog, christopher?" 
 
i said, "i didn't kill the dog." 
 
he said, "do you know that it is wrong to lie to a policeman and that you can get into a very great deal of 
trouble if you do?" 
 

i said, "yes." 
 
he said, "so, do you know who killed the dog?" 
 
i said, "no." 
 
he said, "are you telling the truth?" 
 
i said, "yes. i always tell the truth." 
 
and he said, "right. i am going to give you a caution." 
 
i asked, "is that going to be on a piece of paper like a certificate i can keep?" 
 
he  replied,  "no,  a  caution  means  that  we  are  going  to  keep  a  record  of  what  you  did,  that  you  hit  a 
policeman but that it was an accident and that you didn't mean to hurt the policeman." 
 
i said, "but it wasn't an accident." 
 
and father said, "christopher, please." 
 
the policeman closed his mouth and breathed out loudly through his nose and said, "if you get into any 
more  trouble  we  will  take  out  this  record  and  see  that  you  have  been  given  a  caution  and  we  will  take 
things much more seriously. do you understand what i'm saying?" 
 
i said that i understood. 
 
then he said that we could go and he stood up and opened the door and we walked out into the corridor 
and back to the front desk, where i picked up my swiss army knife and my piece of string and the piece 
of the wooden puzzle and the 5 pellets of rat food for toby and my £1.47 and the paper clip and my front 
door key, which were all in a little plastic bag, and we went out to father's car, which was parked outside, 
and we drove home. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37: 

 
i do not tell lies. mother used to say that this was because i was a good person. but it is not because i am 
a good person. it is because i can't tell lies. 
 
mother was a small person who smelled nice. and she sometimes wore a fleece with a zip down the front 
which was pink and it had a tiny label which said berghaus on the left bosom. 
 
a lie is when you say something happened which didn't happen. but there is only ever one thing which 
happened  at  a  particular  time  and  a  particular  place.  and  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  things  which 
didn't  happen  at  that  time  and  that  place.  and  if  i  think  about  something  which  didn't  happen  i  start 
thinking about all the other things which didn't happen. 
 
for example, this morning for breakfast i had ready brek and some hot raspberry milk shake. but if i say 
that  i  actually  had  shreddies  and  a  mug  of  tea3  i  start  thinking  about  coco  pops  and  lemonade  and 
porridge and dr pepper and how i wasn't eating my breakfast in egypt and there wasn't a rhinoceros in 
the room and father wasn't wearing a diving suit and so on and even writing this  makes  me feel shaky 
and  scared,  like  i  do  when  i'm  standing  on  the  top  of  a  very  tall  building  and  there  are  thousands  of 
houses and  cars and people below  me and  my  head is so full of  all these things that i'm  afraid that i'm 
going to forget to stand up straight and hang on to the rail and i'm going to fall over and be killed. 
 
this  is  another  reason  why  i  don't  like  proper  novels,  because  they  are  lies  about  things  which  didn't 
happen and they make me feel shaky and scared. 
 
and this is why everything i have written here is true. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

41: 

 
there were clouds in the sky on the way home, so i couldn't see the milky way. 
 
i said, "i'm sorry," because father had had to come to the police station, which was a bad thing. 
 
he said, "it's ok." 
 
i said, "i didn't kill the dog." 
 
and he said, "i know." 
 
then he said, "christopher, you have to stay out of trouble, ok?" 
 
i said, "i didn't know i was going to get into trouble. i like wellington and i went to say hello to him, but 
i didn't know that someone had killed him." 
 
father said, "just try and keep your nose out of other people's business." 
 
i thought for a little and i said, "i am going to find out who killed wellington." 
 
and father said, "were you listening to what i was saying, christopher?" 
 
i said, "yes, i was listening to what you were saying, but when someone gets murdered you have to find 
out who did it so that they can be punished." 
 
and he said, "it's a bloody dog, christopher, a bloody dog." 
 
i replied, "i think dogs are important, too." 
 
he said, "leave it." 
 
and i said, "i wonder if the police will find out who killed him and punish the person." 
 
then father banged the steering wheel with his fist and the car weaved a little bit across the dotted line in 
the middle of the road and he shouted, "i said leave it, for god's sake." 
 
i could tell that he was angry because he was shouting, and i didn't want to make him angry so i didn't say 
anything else until we got home. 
 
when  we  came  in  through  the  front  door  i  went  into  the  kitchen  and  got  a  carrot  for  toby  and  i  went 
upstairs  and  i  shut  the  door  of  my  room  and i  let toby  out  and  gave  him  the  carrot.  then  i turned  my 
computer  on  and  played  76  games  of  minesweeper  and  did  the  expert  version  in  102  seconds,  which 
was only 3 seconds off my best time, which was 99 seconds. 
 
at 2:07 a.m. i decided that i wanted a drink of orange squash before i brushed my teeth and got into bed, 
so i went downstairs to the kitchen. father was sitting on the sofa watching snooker on the television and 
drinking scotch. there were tears coming out of his eyes. 
 
i asked, "are you sad about wellington?" 
 
he looked at me for a long time and sucked air in through his nose. then he said, "yes, christopher, you 
could say that. you could very well say that." 

 
i decided to leave him alone because when i am sad i want to be left alone. so i didn't say anything else. i 
just went into the kitchen and made my orange squash and took it back upstairs to my room. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

43: 

 
mother died 2 years ago. 
 
i came home from school one day and no one answered the door, so i went and found the secret key that 
we keep under a flowerpot behind the kitchen door. i let myself into the house and carried on making the 
airfix sherman tank model i was building. 
 
an  hour  and  a  half  later  father  came  home  from  work.  he  runs  a  business  and  he  does  heating 
maintenance and boiler repair with a man called rhodri who is his employee. he knocked on the door of 
my room and opened it and asked whether i had seen mother. 
 
i said that i hadn't seen her and he went downstairs and started making some phone calls. i did not hear 
what he said. 
 
then he came up to my room and said he had to go out for a while and he wasn't sure how long he would 
be. he said that if i needed anything i should call him on his mobile phone. 
 
he was away for 2½ hours. when he came back i went downstairs. he was sitting in the kitchen staring 
out  of  the  back  window  down  the  garden  to  the  pond  and  the  corrugated  iron  fence  and  the  top  of  the 
tower of the church on manstead street which looks like a castle because it is norman. 
 
father said, "i'm afraid you won't be seeing your mother for a while." 
 
he didn't look at me when he said this. he kept on looking through the window. 
 
usually  people  look  at  you  when  they're  talking  to  you.  i  know  that  they're  working  out  what  i'm 
thinking, but i can't tell what they're thinking. it is like being in a room with a one-way mirror in a spy 
film. but this was nice, having father speak to me but not look at me. 
 
i said, "why not?" 
 
he waited for a very long time, then he said, "your mother has had to go into hospital." 
 
"can we visit her?" i asked, because i like hospitals. i like the uniforms and the machines. 
 
father said, "no." 
 
i said, "why can't we?" 
 
and he said, "she needs rest. she needs to be on her own." 
 
i asked, "is it a psychiatric hospital?" 
 
and father said, "no. it's an ordinary hospital. she has a problem. . . a problem with her heart." 
 
i said, "we will need to take food to her," because i knew that food in hospital was not very good. david 
from school, he went into hospital to have an operation on his leg to make his calf muscle longer so that 
he could walk better. and he hated the food, so his mother used to take meals in every day. 
 
father waited for a long time again and said, "i'll take some in to her during the day when you're at school 
and i'll give it to the doctors and they can give it to your mum, ok?" 
 

i said, "but you can't cook." 
 
father  put  his  hands  over  his  face  and  said,  "christopher.  look.  i'll  buy  some  ready-made  stuff  from 
marks and spencer's and take those in. she likes those." 
 
i said i would make her a get well card, because that is what you do for people when they are in hospital. 
 
father said he would take it in the next day. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

47: 

 
in the bus on the way to school next morning we passed 4 red cars in a row, which meant that it was a 
good day, so i decided not to be sad about wellington. 
 
mr. jeavons, the psychologist at the school, once asked me why 4 red cars in a row made it a good day, 
and 3 red cars in a row made it a quite good day, and 5 red cars in a row made it a super good day, 
and why 4 yellow cars in a row made it a black day, which is a day when i don't speak to anyone and sit 
on  my own reading books and don't eat  my lunch and take no risks. he said that i was clearly a very 
logical person, so he was surprised that i should think like this because it wasn't very logical. 
 
i  said  that  i  liked  things  to  be  in  a  nice  order.  and  one  way  of  things  being  in  a  nice  order  was  to  be 
logical.  especially  if  those  things  were  numbers  or  an  argument.  but  there  were  other  ways  of  putting 
things in a nice order. and that was why i had good days and black days. and i said that some people 
who worked in an office came out of their house in the morning and saw that the sun was shining and it 
made them feel happy, or they saw that it was raining and it made them feel sad, but the only difference 
was the weather and if they worked in an office the weather didn't have anything to do with whether they 
had a good day or a bad day. 
 
i said that when father got up in the morning he always put his trousers on before he put his socks on and 
it wasn't logical but he always did it that way, because he liked things in a nice order, too. also whenever 
he went upstairs he went up two at a time, always starting with his right foot. 
 
mr. jeavons said that i was a very clever boy. 
 
i said that i wasn't clever. i was just noticing how things were, and that wasn't clever. that was just being 
observant.  being  clever  was  when  you  looked  at  how  things  were  and  used  the  evidence  to  work  out 
something new. like the universe expanding, or who committed a murder. or if you see someone's name 
and you give each letter a value from 1 to 26 (a = 1, b = 2, etc.) and you add the numbers up in your head 
and you find that it makes a prime number, like jesus christ (151), or scooby-doo (113), or sherlock 
holmes (163), or doctor watson (167). 
 
mr. jeavons asked me whether this made me feel safe, having things always in a nice order, and i said it 
did. 
 
then he asked if i didn't like things changing. and i said i wouldn't mind things changing if i became an 
astronaut, for example, which is one of the biggest changes you can imagine, apart from becoming a girl 
or dying. 
 
he asked whether i wanted to become an astronaut and i said i did. 
 
he said that it was very difficult to become an astronaut. i said that i knew. you had to become an officer 
in  the  air  force  and  you  had  to  take  lots  of  orders  and  be  prepared  to  kill  other  human  beings,  and  i 
couldn't take orders. also i didn't have 20/20 vision, which you needed to be a pilot. but i said that you 
could still want something that is very unlikely to happen. 
 
terry, who is the older brother of francis, who is at the school, said i would only ever get a job collecting 
supermarket trollies or cleaning out donkey shit at an animal sanctuary and they didn't let spazzers drive 
rockets that cost billions of pounds. when i told this to father he said that terry was jealous of my being 
cleverer than him. which was a stupid thing to think because we weren't in a competition. but terry is 
stupid, so quod erat demonstrandum, which is latin for which is the thing that was going to be proved, 
which means thus it is proved. 
 

i'm  not  a  spazzer,  which  means  spastic,  not like  francis,  who  is  a  spazzer, and  even  though  i  probably 
won't become an astronaut, i am going to go to university and study mathematics, or physics, or physics 
and mathematics (which is a joint honor school), because i like mathematics and physics and i'm very 
good at them. but terry won't go to university. father says terry is most likely to end up in prison. 
 
terry has a tattoo on his arm of a heart shape with a knife through the middle of it. 
 
but this is what is called a digression, and now i am going to go back to the fact that it was a good day. 
 
because it was a good day i decided that i would try and find out who killed wellington because a good 
day is a day for projects and planning things. 
 
when  i  said  this  to  siobhan  she  said,  "well, we're  meant  to  be  writing  stories  today,  so  why  don't  you 
write about finding wellington and going to the police station." 
 
and that is when i started writing this. 
 
and siobhan said that she would help with the spelling and the grammar and the footnotes. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

53: 

 
mother died two weeks later. 
 
i had not been into hospital to see her but father had taken in lots of food from marks and spencer's. he 
said that she had been looking ok and seemed to be getting better. she had sent me lots of love and had 
my get well card on the table beside her bed. father said that she liked it very much. 
 
the card had pictures of cars on the front. it looked like this 
 

 

 
 
i did it at school with mrs. peters, who does art, and it was a lino cut, which is when you draw a picture 
on a piece of lino and mrs. peters cuts round the picture with a stanley knife and then you put ink on the 
lino  and  press  it  onto  the  paper,  which  is  why  all  the  cars  looked  the  same,  because  i  did  one  car  and 
pressed it onto the paper 9 times. and it was mrs. peters's idea to do lots of cars, which i liked. and i 
colored all the cars in with red paint to make it a super super good day for mother. 
 
father said that she died of a heart attack and it wasn't expected. 
 
i said, "what kind of heart attack?" because i was surprised. 
 
mother  was  only  38  years  old  and  heart  attacks  usually  happen  to  older  people,  and  mother  was  very 
active and rode a bicycle and ate food which was healthy and high in fiber and low in saturated fat like 
chicken and vegetables and muesli. 
 
father said that he didn't know what kind of heart attack she had and now wasn't the moment to be asking 
questions like that. 
 
i said that it was probably an aneurysm. 
 
a heart attack is when some of the muscles in the heart stop getting blood and die. there are two main 
types of heart attack. the first is an embolism. that is when a blood clot blocks one of the blood vessels 
taking  blood  to  the  muscles  in  the  heart.  and  you  can  stop  this  from  happening  by  taking  aspirin  and 
eating fish. which is why eskimos don't get this sort of heart attack, because they eat fish and fish stops 
their blood from clotting, but if they cut themselves badly they can bleed to death. 
 
but an aneurysm is when a blood vessel breaks and the blood doesn't get to the heart muscles because it is 
leaking. and some people get aneurysms just because there is a weak bit in their blood vessels, like mrs. 
hardisty, who lived at number 72 in our street, who had a weak bit in the blood vessels in her neck and 
died just because she turned her head round to reverse her car into a parking space. 
 
on the other hand, it could have been an embolism, because your blood clots much more easily when you 
are lying down for a long time, like when you are in hospital. 

 
father said, "i'm sorry, christopher, i'm really sorry." 
 
but it wasn't his fault. 
 
then mrs. shears came over and cooked supper for us. and she was wearing sandals and jeans and a t-
shirt which had the words windsurf and corfu and a picture of a windsurfer on it. 
 
and father was sitting down and she stood next to him and held his head against her bosoms and said, 
"come on, ed. we're going to get you through this." 
 
and then she made us spaghetti and tomato sauce. 
 
and after dinner she played scrabble with me and i beat her 247 points to 134. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

59: 

 
i decided that i was going to find out who killed wellington even though father had told me to stay out of 
other people's business. 
 
this is because i do not always do what i am told. 
 
and this is because when people tell you what to do it is usually confusing and does not make sense. 
 
for example, people often say "be quiet," but they don't tell you how long to be quiet for. or you see a 
sign  which  says  keep  off  the  grass  but  it  should  say  keep  off  the  grass  around 
this sign or keep off all the grass in this park because there is lots of grass you are 
allowed to walk on. 
 
also people break rules all the time. for example, father often drives at over 30 mph in a 30 mph zone 
and  sometimes  he  drives  when  he  has  been  drinking  and  often  he  doesn't  wear  his  seat  belt  when  he  is 
driving his van. and in the bible it says thou shall not  kill but there were the crusades and two world 
wars and the gulf war and there were christians killing people in all of them. 
 
also i don't know what father means when he says "stay out of other people's business" because i do not 
know what he means by "other people's business" because i do lots of things with other people, at school 
and in the shop and on the bus, and his job is going into other people's houses and fixing their boilers and 
their heating. and all of these things are other people's business. 
 
siobhan understands. when she tells me not to do something she tells me exactly what it is that i am not 
allowed to do. and i like this. 
 
for example, she once said, "you must never punch sarah or hit her in any way, christopher. even if she 
hits you first. if she does hit you again, move away from her and stand still and count from 1 to 50, then 
come and tell me what she has done, or tell one of the other members of staff what she has done." 
 
or,  for  example,  she  once  said,  "if  you  want  to  go  on  the  swings  and  there  are  already  people  on  the 
swings, you must never push them off. you must ask them if you can have a go. and then you must wait 
until they have finished." 
 
but when other people tell you what you can't do they don't do it like this. so i decide for myself what i 
am going to do and what i am not going to do. 
 
that evening i went round to mrs. shears's house and knocked on the door and waited for her to answer 
it. 
 
when she opened the door she was holding a mug of tea and she was wearing sheepskin slippers and she 
had been watching a quiz program  on the television because there was  a television on and i could hear 
someone  saying,  "the  capital  city  of  venezuela  is...  (a)  maracas,  (b)  caracas,  (c)  bogota  or  (d) 
georgetown." and i knew that it was caracas. 
 
she said, "christopher, i really don't think i want to see you right now." 
 
i said, "i didn't kill wellington." 
 
and she replied, "what are you doing here?" 
 

i said, "i wanted to come and tell you that i didn't kill wellington. and also i want to find out who killed 
him." 
 
some of her tea spilled onto the carpet. 
 
i said, "do you know who killed wellington?" 
 
she didn't answer my question. she just said, "goodbye, christopher," and closed the door. 
 
then i decided to do some detective work. 
 
i could see that she was watching me and waiting for me to leave because i could see her standing in her 
hall  on  the  other  side  of  the  frosted  glass  in  her  front  door.  so  i  walked  down  the  path  and  out  of  the 
garden. then i turned round and saw that she wasn't standing in her hall any longer. i made sure that there 
was  no  one  watching  and  climbed  over  the  wall  and  walked  down  the  side  of  the  house  into  her  back 
garden to the shed where she kept all her gardening tools. 
 
the shed was locked with a padlock and i couldn't go inside so i walked round to the window in the side. 
then i had some good luck. when i looked through the window i could see a fork that looked exactly the 
same as the fork that had been sticking out of wellington. it was lying on the bench by the window and it 
had been cleaned because there was no blood on the spikes. i could see some other tools as well, a spade 
and a rake and one of those long clippers people use for cutting branches which are too high to reach. and 
they  all  had  the  same  green  plastic  handles  like  the  fork.  this  meant  that  the  fork  belonged  to  mrs. 
shears. either that or it was a red herring, which is a clue which makes you come to a wrong conclusion 
or something which looks like a clue but isn't. 
 
i  wondered  if  mrs.  shears  had  killed  wellington  herself.  but  if  she  had  killed  wellington  herself,  why 
had she come out of the house shouting, "what in fuck's name have you done to my dog?" 
 
i  thought  that  mrs.  shears  probably  didn't  kill  wellington.  but  whoever  had  killed  him  had  probably 
killed him with mrs. shears's fork. and the shed was locked. this meant that it was someone who had the 
key to mrs. shears's shed, or that she had left it unlocked, or that she had left her fork lying around in the 
garden. 
 
i heard a noise and turned round and saw mrs. shears standing on the lawn looking at me. 
 
i said, "i came to see if the fork was in the shed." 
 
and she said, "if you don't go now i will call the police again." 
 
so i went home. 
 
when i got home i said hello to father and went upstairs and fed toby, my rat, and felt happy because i 
was being a detective and finding things out. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

61: 

 
mrs. forbes at school said that when mother died she had gone to heaven. that was because mrs. forbes 
is  very  old  and  she  believes  in  heaven.  and  she  wears  tracksuit  trousers  because  she  says  that  they  are 
more  comfortable  than  normal  trousers.  and  one  of  her  legs  is  very  slightly  shorter  than  the  other  one 
because of an accident on a motorbike. 
 
but when mother died she didn't go to heaven because heaven doesn't exist. 
 
mrs. peters's husband is a vicar called the reverend peters, and he comes to our school sometimes to talk 
to us, and i asked him where heaven was and he said, "it's not in our universe. it's another kind of place 
altogether." 
 
the reverend peters makes a funny ticking noise with his tongue sometimes when he is thinking. and he 
smokes cigarettes and you can smell them on his breath and i don't like this. 
 
i  said  that  there  wasn't  anything  outside  the  universe  and  there  wasn't  another  kind  of  place  altogether. 
except  that  there  might  be  if  you  went  through  a  black  hole,  but  a  black  hole  is  what  is  called  a 
singularity,  which  means  it  is  impossible  to  find  out  what  is  on  the  other  side  because  the  gravity  of  a 
black  hole  is  so  big  that  even  electromagnetic  waves  like  light  can't  get  out  of  it,  and  electromagnetic 
waves are how we get information about things which are far away. and if heaven was on the other side 
of a black hole, dead people would have to be fired into space on rockets to get there, and they aren't or 
people would notice. 
 
i think people believe in heaven because they don't like the idea of dying, because they want to carry on 
living and they don't like the idea that other people will move into their house and put their things into the 
rubbish. 
 
the reverend peters said, "well, when i say that heaven is outside the universe it's really just a manner of 
speaking. i suppose what it really means is that they are with god." 
 
and i replied, "but where is god?" 
 
and the reverend peters said that we should talk about this on another day when he had more time. 
 
what actually happens when you die is that your brain stops working and your body rots, like rabbit did 
when  he  died  and  we  buried  him  in  the  earth  at  the  bottom  of  the  garden.  and  all  his  molecules  were 
broken down into other molecules and they went into the earth and were eaten by worms and went into 
the plants and if we go and dig in the same place in 10 years there will be nothing except his skeleton left. 
and in 1,000 years even his skeleton will be gone. but that is all right because he is a part of the flowers 
and the apple tree and the hawthorn bush now. 
 
when people die they are sometimes put into coffins, which means that they don't mix with the earth for a 
very long time until the wood of the coffin rots. 
 
but mother was cremated. this means that she was put into a coffin and burned and ground up and turned 
into ash and smoke. i do not know what happens to the ash and i couldn't ask at the crematorium because 
i didn't go to the funeral. but the smoke goes out of the chimney and into the air and sometimes i look up 
into  the  sky  and  i  think  that  there  are  molecules  of  mother  up  there,  or  in  clouds  over  africa  or  the 
antarctic, or coming down as rain in the rain forests in brazil, or in snow somewhere. 
 

 

67: 

 
the  next  day  was  saturday  and  there  is  not  much  to  do  on  a  saturday  unless  father  takes  me  out 
somewhere on an outing to the boating lake or to the garden center, but on this saturday england were 
playing  romania  at  football,  which  meant  that  we  weren't  going  to  go  on  an  outing  because  father 
wanted to watch the match on the television. so i decided to do some more detection on my own. 
 
i decided that i would go and ask some of the other people who lived in our street if they had seen anyone 
killing wellington or whether they had seen anything strange happening in the street on thursday night. 
 
talking to strangers is not something i usually do. i do not like talking to strangers. this is not because of 
stranger danger, which they tell us about at school, which is where a strange man offers you sweets or a 
ride in his car because he wants to do sex with you. i am not worried about that. if a strange man touched 
me i would hit him, and i can hit people very hard. for example, when i punched sarah because she had 
pulled  my  hair  i  knocked  her  unconscious  and  she  had  concussion  and  they  had  to  take  her  to  the 
accident and emergency department at the hospital. and also i always have my swiss army knife in my 
pocket and it has a saw blade which could cut a man's fingers off. 
 
i do not like strangers because i do not like people i have never met before. they are hard to understand. 
it is like being in france, which is where we went on holiday sometimes when mother was alive, to camp. 
and i hated it because if you went into a shop or a restaurant or on a beach you couldn't understand what 
anyone was saying, which was frightening. 
 
it takes me a long time to get used to people i do not know. for example, when there is a new member of 
staff at school i do not talk to them for weeks and weeks. i just watch them until i know that they are safe. 
then i ask them questions about themselves, like whether they have pets and what is their favorite color 
and what do they know about the apollo space missions and i get them to draw a plan of their house and i 
ask them what kind of car they drive, so i get to know them. then i don't mind if i am in the same room 
as them and don't have to watch them all the time. 
 
so talking to the other people in our street was brave. but if you are going to do detective work you have 
to be brave, so i had no choice. 
 
first of all i made a plan of our part of the street, which is called randolph street, like this 
 

 
 
then i made sure i had my swiss army knife in my pocket and i went out and i knocked on the door of 
number 40, which is opposite mrs. shears's house, which means that they were most likely to have seen 
something. the people who live at number 40 are called thompson. 

 

mr. thompson answered the door. he was wearing a t-shirt which said  

beer  

helping ugly people have sex  
for 2,000 years 

mr. thompson said, "can i help you?" 

i said, "do you know who killed wellington?" 

i did not look at his face. i do not like looking at people's faces, especially if they are strangers. he did 
not say anything for a few seconds. 

then he said, "who are you?" 

i said, "i'm christopher boone from number 36 and i know you. you're mr. thompson." 

he said, "i'm mr. thompson's brother." 

i said, "do you know who killed wellington?" 

he said, "who the fuck is wellington?" 

i said, "mrs. shears's dog. mrs. shears is from number 41." 

he said, "someone killed her dog?" 

i said, "with a fork." 

he said, "jesus christ." 

i said, "a garden fork," in case he thought i meant a fork you eat your food with. then i said, "do you 
know who killed him?" 

he said, "i haven't a bloody clue." 

i said, "did you see anything suspicious on thursday evening?" 

he said, "look, son, do you really think you should be going around asking questions like this?" 

and i said, "yes, because i want to find out who killed wellington, and i am writing a book about it." 

and he said, "well, i was in colchester on thursday, so you're asking the wrong bloke." 

i said, "thank you," and i walked away. 

there was no answer at house number 42. 
 
i had seen the people who lived at number 44, but i did not know what their names were. they were black 
people and they were a man and a lady with two children, a boy and a girl. the lady answered the door. 
she  was  wearing  boots  which  looked  like  army  boots  and  there  were  5  bracelets  made  out  of  a  silver-
colored metal on her wrist and they made a jangling noise. she said, "it's christopher, isn't it." 
 
i said that it was, and i asked her if she knew who killed wellington. she knew who wellington was so i 
didn't have to explain, and she had heard about him being killed. 
 
i asked if she had seen anything suspicious on thursday evening which might be a clue. 
 
she said, "like what?" 
 
and i said, "like strangers. or like the sound of people arguing." 
 
but she said she hadn't. 
 
and  then  i  decided  to  do  what  is  called  trying  a  different  tack,  and  i  asked  her  whether  she  knew  of 
anyone who might want to make mrs. shears sad. 
 
and she said, "perhaps you should be talking to your father about this." 
 
and i explained that i couldn't ask my father because the investigation was a secret because he had told 
me to stay out of other people's business. 
 
she said, "well, maybe he has a point, christopher." 
 
and i said, "so, you don't know anything which might be a clue." 
 
and she said, "no," and then she said, "you be careful, young man." 
 
i  said  that  i  would  be  careful  and  then  i  said  thank  you  to  her for helping  me  with  my  questions  and  i 
went to number 43, which is the house next to mrs. shears's house. 
 
the people who live at number 43 are mr. wise and mr. wise's mother, who is in a wheelchair, which is 
why he lives with her, so he can take her to the shops and drive her around. 
 
it  was  mr.  wise  who  answered  the  door.  he  smelled  of  body  odor  and  old  biscuits  and  off  popcorn, 
which is what you smell of if you haven't washed for a very long time, like jason at school smells because 
his family is poor. 
 
i asked mr. wise if he knew who had killed wellington on thursday night. 
 
he said, "bloody hell, policemen really are getting younger, aren't they." 
 
then he laughed. i do not like people laughing at me, so i turned and walked away. 
 

i did not knock at the door of number 38, which is the house next to our house, because the people there 
take drugs and father says that i should never talk to them, so i don't. and they play loud music at night 
and they make me scared sometimes when i see them in the street. and it is not really their house. 
 
then i noticed that the old lady who lives at number 39, which is on the other side of mrs. shears's house, 
was in her front garden cutting her hedge with an electric hedge trimmer. 
 
her name is mrs. alexander. she has a dog. it is a dachshund, so she was probably a good person because 
she liked dogs. but the dog wasn't in the garden with her. it was inside the house. 
 
mrs. alexander was wearing jeans and training shoes, which old people don't normally wear. and there 
was mud on the jeans. and the trainers were new balance trainers. and the laces were red. 
 
i went up to mrs. alexander and said, "do you know anything about wellington being killed?" 
 
then she turned the electric hedge trimmer off and said, "i'm afraid you're going to have to say that again. 
i'm a little deaf." 
 
so i said, "do you know anything about wellington being killed?" 
 
and she said, "i heard about it yesterday. dreadful. dreadful." 
 
i said, "do you know who killed him?" 
 
and she said, "no, i don't." 
 
i  replied,  "somebody  must  know  because  the  person  who  killed  wellington  knows  that  they  killed 
wellington.  unless they were  a  mad person and didn't know what they were doing. or unless they had 
amnesia." 
 
and she said, "well, i suppose you're probably right." 
 
i said, "thank you for helping me with my investigation." 
 
and she said, "you're christopher, aren't you." 
 
i said, "yes. i live at number 36." 
 
and she said, "we haven't talked before, have we." 
 
i said, "no. i don't like talking to strangers. but i'm doing detective work." 
 
and she said, "i see you every day, going to school." 
 
i didn't reply to this. 
 
and she said, "it's very nice of you to come and say hello." 
 
i didn't reply to this either because mrs. alexander was doing what is called chatting, where people say 
things to each other which aren't questions and answers and aren't connected. 
 
then she said, "even if it's only because you're doing detective work." 
 
and i said, "thank you" again. 

 
and i was about to turn and walk away when she said, "i have a grandson your age." 
 
i tried to do chatting by saying, "my age is 15 years and 3 months and 3 days." 
 
and she said, "well, almost your age." 
 
then we said nothing for a little while until she said, "you don't have a dog, do you?" 
 
and i said, "no." 
 
she said, "you'd probably like a dog, wouldn't you." 
 
and i said, "i have a rat." 
 
and she said, "a rat?" 
 
and i said, "he's called toby." 
 
and she said, "oh." 
 
and i said, "most people don't like rats because they think they carry diseases like bubonic plague. but 
that's only because they lived in sewers and stowed away on ships coming from foreign countries where 
there were strange diseases. but rats are very clean. toby is always washing himself. and you don't have 
to  take  him  out  for  walks.  i  just  let  him  run  around  my  room  so  that  he  gets  some  exercise.  and 
sometimes he sits on my shoulder or hides in my sleeve like it's a burrow. but rats don't live in burrows in 
nature." 
 
mrs. alexander said, "do you want to come in for tea?" 
 
and i said, "i don't go into other people's houses." 
 
and she said, "well, maybe i could bring some out here. do you like lemon squash?" 
 
i replied, "i only like orange squash." 
 
and she said, "luckily i have some of that as well. and what about battenberg?" 
 
and i said, "i don't know because i don't know what battenberg is." 
 
she said, "it's a kind of cake. it has four pink and yellow squares in the middle and it has marzipan icing 
round the edge." 
 
and i said, "is it a long cake with a square cross section which is divided into equally sized, alternately 
colored squares?" 
 
and she said, "yes, i think you could probably describe it like that." 
 
i said, "i think i'd like the pink squares but not the yellow squares because i don't like yellow. and i don't 
know what marzipan is, so i don't know whether i'd like that." 
 
and she said, "i'm afraid marzipan is yellow, too. perhaps i should bring out some biscuits instead. do 
you like biscuits?" 
 

and i said, "yes. some sorts of biscuits." 
 
and she said, "i'll get a selection." 
 
then she turned and went into the house. she  moved very slowly because she was an old lady and she 
was inside the house for more than 6 minutes and i began to get nervous because i didn't know what she 
was doing in the house. i didn't know her well enough to know whether she was telling the truth about 
getting orange squash and battenberg cake. and i thought she might be ringing the police and then i'd get 
into much more serious trouble because of the caution. 
 
so i walked away. 
 
and as i was crossing the street i had a stroke of inspiration about who might have killed wellington. i 
was imagining a chain of reasoning inside my head which was like this 

1. why would you kill a dog? 
   a) because you hated the dog. 
   b) because you were mad. 
   c) because you wanted to make mrs. shears upset. 
2. i didn't know anyone who hated wellington, so if it was (a) it was probably a stranger. 
3. i didn't know any mad people, so if it was (b) it was also probably a stranger. 
4. most murders are committed by someone who is known to the victim. in fact, you are most likely 
to  be  murdered  by  a  member  of  your  own  family  on  christmas  day.  this  is  a  fact.  wellington  was 
therefore most likely to have been killed by someone known to him. 

5. if it was (c) i only knew one person who didn't like mrs. shears, and that was mr. shears, who 

knew wellington very well indeed. 
 
 
this meant that mr. shears was my prime suspect. 
 
mr.  shears  used  to  be  married  to  mrs.  shears  and  they  lived  together  until  two  years  ago.  then  mr. 
shears  left  and  didn't  come  back.  this  was  why  mrs.  shears  came  over  and  did  lots  of  cooking  for  us 
after mother died, because she didn't have to cook for mr. shears anymore and she didn't have to stay at 
home and be his wife. and also father said that she needed company and didn't want to be on her own. 
 
and sometimes mrs. shears stayed overnight at our house and i liked it when she did because she made 
things tidy and she arranged the jars and pans and tins in order of their height on the shelves in the kitchen 
and she always made their labels face outward and she put the knives and forks and spoons in the correct 
compartments  in  the  cutlery  drawer.  but  she  smoked  cigarettes  and  she  said  lots  of  things  i  didn't 
understand, e.g., "i'm going to hit the hay," and "it's brass monkeys out there," and "let's rustle up some 
tucker." and i didn't like when she said things like that because i didn't know what she meant. 
 
and i don't know why mr. shears left mrs. shears because nobody told me. but when you get married it 
is because you want to live together and have children,  and if you get  married  in  a church you have  to 
promise that you will stay together until death do us part. and if you don't want to live together you have 
to get divorced and this is because one of you has done sex with somebody else or because you are having 
arguments  and  you  hate  each  other  and  you  don't  want  to  live  in  the  same  house  anymore  and  have 
children. and mr. shears didn't want to live in the same house as mrs. shears anymore so he probably 
hated her and he might have come back and killed her dog to make her sad.  
 
i decided to try and find out more about mr. shears. 
 

71: 

all the other children at my school are stupid. except i'm not meant to call them stupid, even though this 
is what they are. i'm meant to say that they have learning difficulties or that they have special needs. but 
this  is  stupid  because  everyone  has  learning  difficulties  because  learning  to  speak  french  or 
understanding relativity is difficult and also everyone has special needs, like father, who has to carry a 
little packet of artificial sweetening tablets around with him to put in his coffee to stop him from getting 
fat, or mrs. peters, who wears a beige-colored hearing aid, or siobhan, who has glasses so thick that they 
give you a headache if you borrow them, and none of these people are special needs, even if they have 
special needs. 
 
but  siobhan  said  we  have  to  use  those  words  because  people  used  to  call  children  like  the  children  at 
school  spaz  and  crip  and  mong,  which  were  nasty  words.  but  that  is  stupid  too  because  sometimes  the 
children from the school down the road see us in the street when we're getting off the bus and they shout, 
"special needs! special needs!" but i don't  take  any notice because i don't listen  to what other people 
say and only sticks and stones can break my bones and i have my swiss army knife if they hit me and if i 
kill them it will be self-defense and i won't go to prison. 
 
i am going to prove that i'm not stupid. next month i'm going to take my a level in maths and i'm going 
to  get  an  a  grade.  no  one  has  ever  taken  an  a  level  at  our  school  before,  and  the  headmistress,  mrs. 
gascoyne, didn't want me to take it at first. she said they didn't have the facilities to let us sit a levels. 
but father had an argument with mrs. gascoyne and he got really cross. mrs. gascoyne said they didn't 
want  to  treat  me  differently  from  everyone  else  in  the  school  because  then  everyone  would  want  to  be 
treated differently and it would set a precedent. and i could always do my a levels later, at 18. 
 
i  was  sitting  in  mrs.  gascoyne's  office  with  father  when  she  said  these  things.  and  father  said, 
"christopher is getting a crap enough deal already, don't you think, without you shitting on him from  a 
great height as well. jesus, this is the one thing he is really good at." 
 
then mrs. gascoyne said that she and father should talk about this at some later point on their own. but 
father asked her whether she wanted to say things she was embarrassed to say in front of me, and she said 
no, so he said, "say them now, then." 
 
and she said that if i sat an a level i would have to have a member of staff looking after me on my own 
in a separate room. and father said he would pay someone £50 to do it after school and he wasn't going 
to  take  no  for  an  answer.  and  she  said  she'd  go  away  and  think  about  it.  and  the  next  week  she  rang 
father at home and told him that i could take the a level and the reverend peters would be what is called 
the invigilator. 
 
and after i've taken a-level maths i am going to take a-level further maths and physics and then i can go 
to university. there is not a university in our town, which is swindon, because it is a small place. so we 
will have to move to another town where there is a university because i don't want to live on my own or 
in a house with other students. but that will be all right because father wants to move to a different town 
as well. he sometimes say things like, "we've got to get out of this town, kiddo." and sometimes he says, 
"swindon is the arsehole of the world." 
 
then, when i've got a degree in maths, or physics, or maths and physics, i will be able to get a job and 
earn lots of money and i will be able to pay someone who can look after me and cook my meals and wash 
my  clothes,  or  i  will  get  a  lady  to  marry  me  and  be  my  wife  and  she  can  look  after  me  so  i  can  have 
company and not be on my own. 
 

 

73: 

 
i used to think that mother and father might get divorced. that was because they had lots of arguments 
and sometimes they hated each other. this was because of the stress of looking after someone who has 
behavioral  problems  like  i  have.  i  used  to  have  lots  of  behavioral  problems,  but  i  don't  have  so  many 
now because i'm more grown up and i can take decisions for myself and do things on my own like going 
out of the house and buying things at the shop at the end of the road. these are some of my behavioral 
problems 
 

a.  not talking to people for a long time 4  
b.  not eating or drinking anything for a long time 5  
c.  not liking being touched  
d.  screaming when i am angry or confused  
e.  not liking being in really small places with other people  
f.  smashing things when i am angry or confused  
g.  groaning  
h.  not liking yellow things or brown things and refusing to touch yellow things or brown things  
i.  refusing to use my toothbrush if anyone else has touched it  
j.  not eating food if different sorts of food are touching each other  
k.  not noticing that people are angry with me  
l.  not smiling  
m. saying things that other people think are rude 6  
n.  doing stupid things 7  
o.  hitting other people  
p.  hating france  
q.  driving mother's car 8  
r.  getting cross when someone has moved the furniture 9  

 
sometimes these things would make mother and father really angry and they would shout at me or they 
would  shout  at  each  other.  sometimes  father  would  say,  "christopher,  if  you  do  not  behave  i  swear  i 
shall  knock  the  living  daylights  out  of  you,"  or  mother  would  say,  "jesus,  christopher,  i  am  seriously 
considering  putting  you  in  a  home,"  or  mother  would  say,  "you  are  going  to  drive  me  into  an  early 
grave." 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

79: 

 
when  i  got  home  father  was  sitting  at  the  table  in  the  kitchen  and  he  had  made  my  supper.  he  was 
wearing  a  lumberjack  shirt.  the  supper  was  baked  beans  and  broccoli  and  two  slices  of  ham  and  they 
were laid out on the plate so that they were not touching. 
 
he said, "where have you been?" 
 
and i said, "i have been out." this is called a white lie. a white lie is not a lie at all. it is where you tell 
the  truth  but  you  do  not  tell  all  of  the  truth.  this  means  that  everything  you  say  is  a  white  lie  because 
when someone says, for example, "what do you want to do today?" you say, "i want to do painting with 
mrs. peters," but you don't say, "i want to have my lunch and i want to go to the toilet and i want to go 
home after school and i want to play with toby and i want to have my supper and i want to play on my 
computer and i want to go to bed." and i said a white lie because i knew that father didn't want me to be 
a detective. 
 
father said, "i have just had a phone call from mrs. shears." 
 
i started eating my baked beans and broccoli and two slices of ham. 
 
then father asked, "what the hell were you doing poking round her garden?" 
 
i said, "i was doing detective work trying to find out who killed wellington." 
 
father replied, "how many times do i have to tell you, christopher?" 
 
the baked beans and the broccoli and the ham were cold but i didn't mind this. i eat very slowly so my 
food is nearly always cold. 
 
father said, "i told you to keep your nose out of other people's business." 
 
i said, "i think mr. shears probably killed wellington." 
 
father didn't say anything. 
 
i  said,  "he  is  my  prime  suspect.  because  i  think  someone  might  have  killed  wellington  to  make  mrs. 
shears sad. and a murder is usually committed by someone known --" 
 
father banged the table with his fist really hard so that the plates and his knife and fork jumped around 
and  my  ham  jumped  sideways  so  that  it  touched  the  broccoli,  so  i  couldn't  eat  the  ham  or  the  broccoli 
anymore. 
 
then he shouted, "i will not have that man's name mentioned in my house." 
 
i asked, "why not?" 
 
and he said, "that man is evil." 
 
and i said, "does that mean he might have killed wellington?" 
 
father put his head in his hands and said, "jesus wept." 

 
i  could  see  that  father  was  angry with  me,  so  i said,  "i know you  told  me  not  to  get  involved  in  other 
people's business but mrs. shears is a friend of ours." 
 
and father said, "well, she's not a friend anymore." 
 
and i asked, "why not?" 
 
and father said, "ok, christopher. i am going to say this for the last and final time. i will not tell you 
again. look at  me when i'm talking to you, for god's sake. look at  me. you are not to go asking mrs. 
shears about who killed that bloody dog. you are not to go asking anyone about who killed that bloody 
dog.  you  are  not  to  go  trespassing  in  other  people's  gardens.  you  are  to  stop  this  ridiculous  bloody 
detective game right now." 
 
i didn't say anything. 
 
father said, "i am going to make you promise, christopher. and you know what it means when i make 
you promise." 
 
i did know what it meant when you say you promise something. you have to say that you will never do 
something  again  and  then  you  must  never  do  it  because  that  would  make  the  promise  a  lie.  i  said,  "i 
know." 
 
father said, "promise me you will stop doing these things. promise that you will give up this ridiculous 
game right now, ok?" 
 
i said, "i promise." 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

83: 

 
i think i would make a very good astronaut. 
 
to be a good astronaut you have to be intelligent and i'm intelligent. you also have to understand how 
machines  work  and  i'm  good  at  understanding  how  machines  work.  you  also  have  to  be  someone who 
would  like  being  on  their  own  in  a  tiny  spacecraft  thousands  and  thousands  of  miles  away  from  the 
surface  of  the  earth  and  not  panic  or  get  claustrophobia  or  homesick  or  insane.  and  i  like  really  little 
spaces, so long as there is no one else in them with me. sometimes when i want to be on my own i get 
into  the  airing  cupboard  outside  the  bathroom  and  slide  in  beside  the  boiler  and  pull  the  door  closed 
behind me and sit there and think for hours and it makes me feel very calm. 
 
so i would have to be an astronaut on my own, or have my own part of the spacecraft which no one else 
could come into. 
 
and also there are no yellow things or brown things in a spacecraft, so that would be ok, too. 
 
and  i  would  have  to  talk  to  other  people  from  mission  control,  but  we  would  do  that  through  a  radio 
linkup  and  a  tv  monitor,  so  they  wouldn't  be  like  real  people  who  are  strangers,  but  it  would  be  like 
playing a computer game. 
 
also  i  wouldn't  be  homesick  at  all  because  i'd  be  surrounded  by  lots  of  the  things  i  like,  which  are 
machines  and  computers  and  outer  space.  and  i  would  be  able  to  look  out  of  a  little  window  in  the 
spacecraft and know that there was no one else near me for thousands and thousands of miles, which is 
what i sometimes pretend at night in the summer when i go and lie on the lawn and look up at the sky and 
i put my hands round the sides of my face so that i can't see the fence and the chimney and the washing 
line and i can pretend i'm in space. 
 
and all i could see would be stars. and stars are the places where the molecules that life is made of were 
constructed  billions  of  years  ago.  for  example,  all  the  iron  in  your  blood  which  stops  you  from  being 
anemic was made in a star. 
 
and  i  would  like  it  if  i  could  take  toby  with  me  into  space,  and  that  might  be  allowed  because  they 
sometimes do take animals into space for experiments, so if i could think of a good experiment you could 
do with a rat that didn't hurt the rat, i could make them let me take toby. 
 
but if they didn't let me i would still go because it would be a dream come true. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

89: 

 
the  next  day  at  school  i  told  siobhan  that  father  had  told  me  i  couldn't  do  any  more  detecting,  which 
meant  that  the  book  was  finished.  i  showed  her  the  pages  i  had  written  so  far,  with  the  diagram  of  the 
universe and the map of the street and the prime numbers. and she said that it didn't matter. she said the 
book was really good as it was and that i should be very proud of having written a book at all, even if it 
was  quite  short  and  there  were  some  very  good  books  which  were  very  short  like  heart  of  darkness, 
which was by conrad. 
 
but i said that it wasn't a proper book because it didn't have a proper ending because i never found out 
who killed wellington so the murderer was still at large. 
 
and she said that was like life, and not all murders were solved and not all murderers were caught. like 
jack the ripper. 
i said i didn't like the idea that the murderer was still at large. i said i didn't like to think that the person 
who  killed  wellington  could  be  living  somewhere  nearby  and  i  might  meet  him  when  i  went  out  for  a 
walk  at  night.  and  this  was  possible  because  a  murder  was  usually  committed  by  a  person  who  was 
known to the victim. 
 
then i said, "father said i was never to mention mr. shears's name in our house again and that he was an 
evil man and maybe that meant he was the person who killed wellington." 
 
and she said, "perhaps your father just doesn't like mr. shears very much." 
 
and i asked, "why?" 
 
and she said, "i don't know, christopher. i don't know because i don't know anything about mr. shears." 
 
i said, "mr. shears used to be married to mrs. shears and he left her, like in a divorce. but i don't know if 
they were actually divorced." 
 
and siobhan said, "well, mrs. shears is a friend of yours, isn't she. a friend of you and your father. so 
perhaps your father doesn't like mr. shears because he left mrs. shears. because he did something bad to 
someone who is a friend." 
 
and i said, "but father says mrs. shears isn't a friend of ours anymore." 
 
and siobhan said, "i'm sorry, christopher. i wish i could answer all these questions, but i simply don't 
know." 
 
then the bell went for the end of school. 
 
the next day i saw 4 yellow cars in a row on the way to school, which made it a black day, so i didn't 
eat anything at lunch and i sat in the corner of the room all day and read my a-level maths course book. 
and the next day, too, i saw 4 yellow cars in a row on the way to school, which made it another black 
day  too,  so  i  didn't  speak  to  anyone  and  for  the  whole  afternoon  i  sat  in  the  corner  of  the  library 
groaning with my head pressed into the join between the two walls and this made me feel calm and safe. 
but on the third day i kept my eyes closed all the way to school until we got off the bus because after i 
have had 2 black days in a row i'm allowed to do that. 
 

 

97: 

but it wasn't the end of the book because five days later i saw 5 red cars in a row, which made it a super 
good day, and i knew that something special was going to happen. nothing special happened at school 
so i knew something special was going to happen after school. and when i got home i went down to the 
shop at the end of our road to buy some licorice laces and a milky bar with my pocket money. 
 
and when i had bought my licorice laces and a milky bar i turned round and saw mrs. alexander, the old 
lady  from  number  39,  who  was  in  the  shop  as  well.  she  wasn't  wearing  jeans  now.  she  was  wearing  a 
dress like a normal old lady. and she smelled of cooking. 
 
she said, "what happened to you the other day?" 
 
i asked, "which day?" 
 
and she said, "i came out again and you'd gone. i had to eat all the biscuits myself." 
 
i said, "i went away." 
 
and she said, "i gathered that." 
 
i said, "i thought you might ring the police." 
 
and she said, "why on earth would i do that?" 
 
and  i  said,  "because  i  was  poking  my  nose  into  other  people's  business  and  father  said  i  shouldn't 
investigate who killed wellington. and a policeman gave me a caution and if i get into trouble again it 
will be a lot worse because of the caution." 
 
then the indian lady behind the counter said to mrs. alexander, "can i help you?" and mrs. alexander 
said she'd like a pint of milk and a packet of jaffa cakes and i went out of the shop. 
 
when i was outside the shop i saw that mrs. alexander's dachshund was sitting on the pavement. it was 
wearing a little coat made out of tartan material, which is scottish and check. she had tied its lead to the 
drainpipe next to the door. i like dogs, so i bent down and i said hello to her dog and it licked my hand. 
its tongue was rough and wet and it liked the smell on my trousers and started sniffing them. 
 
then mrs. alexander came outside and said, "his name is ivor." 
 
i didn't say anything. 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "you're very shy, aren't you, christopher." 
 
and i said, "i'm not allowed to talk to you." 
 
and she said, "don't worry. i'm not going to tell the police and i'm not going to tell your father, because 
there's nothing wrong with having a chat. having a chat is just being friendly, isn't it." 
 
i said, "i can't do chatting." 
 
then she said, "do you like computers?" 
 
and i said, "yes. i like computers. i have a computer at home in my bedroom." 

 
and she said, "i know. i can see you sitting at your computer in your bedroom sometimes when i look 
across the street." 
 
then she untied ivor's lead from the drainpipe. 
 
i wasn't going to say anything because i didn't want to get into trouble. 
 
then  i  thought  that  this  was  a  super  good  day  and  something  special  hadn't  happened  yet,  so  it  was 
possible that talking to mrs. alexander was the special thing that was going to happen. and i thought that 
she  might  tell  me  something  about  wellington  or  about  mr.  shears  without  me  asking  her,  so  that 
wouldn't be breaking my promise. 
 
so i said, "and i like maths and looking after toby. and also i like outer space and i like being on my 
own." 
 
and she said, "i bet you're very good at maths, aren't you." 
 
and i said, "i am. i'm going to do my a-level maths next month. and i'm going to get an a grade." 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "really? a-level maths?" 
 
i replied, "yes. i don't tell lies." 
 
and she said, "i apologize. i didn't mean to suggest that you were lying. i just wondered if i heard you 
correctly. i'm a little deaf sometimes." 
 
and i said, "i remember. you told me." and then i said, "i'm the first person to do an a level from my 
school because it's a special school." 
 
and she said, "well, i am very impressed. and i hope you do get an a." 
 
and i said, "i will. " 
 
then she said, "and the other thing i know about you is that your favorite color is not yellow." 
 
and i said, "no. and it's not brown either. my favorite color is red. and metal color." 
 
then ivor did a poo and mrs. alexander picked it up with her hand inside a little plastic bag and then she 
turned the plastic bag inside out and tied a knot in the top so that the poo was all sealed up and she didn't 
touch the poo with her hands. 
 
and then i did some reasoning. i reasoned that father had only made me do a promise about five things, 
which were 
 

1.  not to mention mr. shears's name in our house  
2.  not to go asking mrs. shears about who killed that bloody dog  
3.  not to go asking anyone about who killed that bloody dog  
4.  not to go trespassing in other people's gardens  
5.  to stop this ridiculous bloody detective game  

 

and asking about mr. shears wasn't any of these things.   
 
and if you are a detective you have to take risks, and this was a super good day, which meant it was a 
good day for taking risks, so i said, "do you know mr. shears?" which was like chatting. 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "not really, no. i mean, i knew him well enough to say hello and talk to a little 
in the street, but i didn't know much about him. i think he worked in a bank. the national westminster. 
in town." 
 
and  i  said,  "father  says  that  he  is  an  evil  man.  do  you  know  why  he  said  that?  is  mr.  shears  an  evil 
man?" 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "why are you asking me about mr. shears, christopher?" 
 
i didn't say anything because i didn't want to be investigating wellington's murder and that was the reason 
i was asking about mr. shears. 
 
but mrs. alexander said, "is this about wellington?" 
 
and i nodded because that didn't count as being a detective. 
 
mrs. alexander didn't say anything. she walked to the little red box on a pole next to the gate to the park 
and she put ivor's poo into the box, which was a brown thing inside a red thing, which made my head feel 
funny so i didn't look. then she walked back to me. 
 
she sucked in a big breath and said, "perhaps it would be best not to talk about these things, christopher." 
 
and i asked, "why not?" 
 
and  she  said,  "because."  then  she  stopped  and  decided  to  start  saying  a  different  sentence.  "because 
maybe your father is right and you shouldn't go around asking questions about this." 
 
and i asked, "why?" 
 
and she said, "because obviously he is going to find it quite upsetting." 
 
and i said, "why is he going to find it upsetting?" 
 
then she sucked in another big breath and said, "because. . . because i think you know why your father 
doesn't like mr. shears very much." 
 
then i asked, "did mr. shears kill mother?" 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "kill her?" 
 
and i said, "yes. did he kill mother?" 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "no. no. of course he didn't kill your mother." 
 
and i said, "but did he give her stress so that she died of a heart attack?" 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "i honestly don't know what you're talking about, christopher." 
 
and i said, "or did he hurt her so that she had to go into hospital?" 

 
and mrs. alexander said, "did she have to go into hospital?" 
 
and i said, "yes. and it wasn't very serious at first, but she had a heart attack when she was in hospital." 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "oh my goodness." 
 
i said, "and she died." 
 
and mrs. alexander said "oh my goodness" again, and then she said, "oh, christopher, i am so, so sorry. 
i never realized." 
 
then  i  asked  her,  "why  did  you  say  'i  think  you  know  why  your  father  doesn't  like  mr.  shears  very 
much'?" 
 
mrs. alexander put her hand over her  mouth and said, "oh dear, dear, dear." but she didn't answer my 
question. 
 
so i asked her the same question again, because in a murder mystery novel when someone doesn't want to 
answer a question it is because they are trying to keep a secret or trying to stop someone from getting into 
trouble, which means that the answers to those questions are the most important answers of all, and that is 
why the detective has to put that person under pressure. 
 
but mrs. alexander still didn't answer. instead she asked me a question. she said, "so you don't know?" 
 
and i said, "don't know what?" 
 
she  replied,  "christopher,  look,  i  probably  shouldn't  be  telling  you  this."  then  she  said,  "perhaps  we 
should take a little walk in the park together. this is not the place to be talking about this kind of thing." 
 
i was nervous. i did not know mrs. alexander. i knew that she was an old lady and that she liked dogs. 
but she was a stranger. and i never go into the park on my own because it is dangerous and people inject 
drugs behind the public toilets in the corner. i wanted to go home and go up to my room and feed toby 
and practice some maths. 
 
but i was excited, too. because i thought she might tell me a secret. and the secret might be about who 
killed wellington. or about mr. shears. and if she did that i might have more evidence against him, or be 
able to exclude him from my investigations. 
 
so because it was a super good day i decided to walk into the park with mrs. alexander, even though it 
scared me. 
 
when we were inside the park mrs. alexander stopped walking and said, "i am going to say something to 
you and you must promise not to tell your father that i told you this." 
 
i asked, "why?" 
 
and she said, "i shouldn't have said what i said. and if i don't explain, you'll carry on wondering what i 
meant. and you might ask your father. and i don't want you to do that because i don't want you to upset 
him. so i'm going to explain why i said what i said. but before i do that you have to promise not to tell 
anyone i said this to you." 
 
i asked, "why?" 
 

and she said, "christopher, please, just trust me." 
 
and i said, "i promise." because if mrs. alexander told  me who killed wellington, or she told me that 
mr. shears had really killed mother, i could still go to the police and tell them because you are allowed to 
break a promise if someone has committed a crime and you know about it. 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "your mother, before she died, was very good friends with mr. shears." 
 
and i said, "i know." 
 
and she said, "no, christopher. i'm not sure that you do. i mean that they were very good friends. very, 
very good friends." 
 
i thought about this for a while and said, "do you mean that they were doing sex?" 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "yes, christopher. that is what i mean." 
 
then she didn't say anything for about 30 seconds. then she said, "i'm sorry, christopher. i really didn't 
mean to say anything that was going to upset you. but i wanted to explain. why i said what i said. you 
see, i thought you knew. that's why your father thinks that mr. shears is an evil man. and that will be 
why he doesn't want you going around talking to people about mr. shears. because that will bring back 
bad memories." 
 
and  i  said,  "was  that  why  mr.  shears  left  mrs.  shears,  because  he  was  doing  sex  with  someone  else 
when he was married to mrs. shears?" 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "yes, i expect so." 
 
then she said, "i'm sorry, christopher. i really am." 
 
and i said, "i think i should go now." 
 
and she said, "are you ok, christopher?" 
 
and i said, "i'm scared of being in the park with you because you're a stranger." 
 
and she said, "i'm not a stranger, christopher, i'm a friend." 
 
and i said, "i'm going to go home now." 
 
and she said, "if you want to talk about this you can come and see me anytime you want. you only have 
to knock on my door." 
 
and i said, "ok." 
 
and she said, "christopher?" 
 
and i said, "what?" 
 
and she said, "you won't tell your father about this conversation, will you?" 
 
and i said, "no. i promised." 
 
and she said, "you go on home. and remember what i said. anytime." 

 
then i went home. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

101: 

mr. jeavons said that i liked maths because it was safe. he said i liked maths because it meant solving 
problems,  and  these  problems  were  difficult  and  interesting  but  there  was  always  a  straightforward 
answer  at  the  end.  and  what  he  meant  was  that  maths  wasn't  like  life  because  in  life  there  are  no 
straightforward answers at the end. i know he meant this because this is what he said. 
 
this is because mr. jeavons doesn't understand numbers. 
 
here is a famous story called  the monty  hall  problem which i have included in this book because it 
illustrates what i mean. 
 
there used to be a column called ask marilyn in a magazine called parade in america. and this column 
was written by marilyn vos savant and in the magazine it said that she had the highest iq in the world in 
the guinness book of world records hall of fame. and in the column she answered maths questions 
sent in by readers. and in september 1990 this question was sent in by craig f. whitaker of columbia, 
maryland  (but  it  is  not  what  is  called  a  direct  quote  because  i  have  made  it  simpler  and  easier  to 
understand) 
 
 
you are on a game show on television. on this game show the idea is to win a car as a prize. the game 
show host shows you three doors. he says that there is a car behind one of the doors and there are goats 
behind the other two doors. he asks you to pick a door. you pick a door but the door is not opened. then 
the  game  show  host  opens  one  of  the  doors  you  didn't  pick  to  show  a  goat  (because  he  knows  what  is 
behind the doors). then he says that you have one final chance to change your mind before the doors are 
opened and you get a car or a goat. so he asks you if you want to change your mind and pick the other 
unopened door instead. what should you do? 

marilyn vos savant said that you should always change and pick the final door because the chances are 2 
in 3 that there will be a car behind that door. 

but if you use your intuition you think that chance is 50-50 because you think there is an equal chance 
that the car is behind any door. 

lots of people wrote to the magazine to say that marilyn vos savant was wrong, even when she explained 
very carefully why she was right. of the letters she got about the problem, 92% said that she was wrong 
and lots of these were from mathematicians and scientists. here are some of the things that they said 

i'm very concerned with the general public's lack of mathematical skills. please help by confessing your 
error. 
 
-- robert sachs, ph.d., george mason university 

there  is  enough  mathematical  illiteracy  in  this  country,  and  we  don't  need  the  world's  highest  iq 
propagating more. shame! 

 
-- scott smith, ph.d., university of florida 

i  am  in  shock  that  after  being  corrected  by  at  least  three  mathematicians,  you  still  do  not  see  your 
mistake. 

 
-- kent ford, dickinson state university 

i am sure you will receive many letters from high school and college students. perhaps you should keep a 
few addresses for help with future columns. 

 
-- w. robert smith, ph.d., georgia state university 

you are utterly incorrect... how many irate mathematicians are needed to get you to change your mind? 

 
-- e. ray bobo, ph.d., georgetown university 

if all those ph.d.'s were wrong, the country would be in very serious trouble. 

 
-- everett harman, ph.d., u.s. army research institute 

but marilyn vos savant was right. and here are 2 ways you can show this. 

firstly you can do it by maths like this 

let the doors be called x, y and z. 
let cx be the event that the car is behind door x and so on. 
let hx be the event that the host opens door x and so on. 
supposing that  you  choose  door  x,  the  possibility  that  you  win  a  car  if  you  then  switch  your 

choice is given by the following formula 

p(hz ^ cy) + p(hy ^ cz) 
= p(cy)·p (hz ¦ cy) + p(cz)·p(hy ¦ cz) 
= (1/3 · 1) + (1/3 · 1) = 2/3 
 

the second way you can work it out is by making a picture of all the possible outcomes like this 
 

 

 
 
so if you change, 2 times out of 3 you get a car. and if you stick, you only get a car 1 time out of 3. 
 
and this shows that intuition can sometimes get things wrong. and intuition is what people use in life to 
make decisions. but logic can help you work out the right answer. 
 
it  also  shows  that  mr.  jeavons  was  wrong  and  numbers  are  sometimes  very  complicated  and  not  very 
straightforward at all. and that is why i like the monty hall problem. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

103: 

 
when  i  got  home  rhodri  was  there.  rhodri  is  the  man  who  works  for  father,  helping  him  do  heating 
maintenance and boiler repair. and he sometimes comes round to the house in the evening to drink beer 
with father and watch the television and have a conversation. 
 
rhodri was wearing a pair of white dungarees which had dirty marks all over them and he had a gold ring 
on the middle finger of his left hand and he smelled of something i do not know the name of which father 
often smells of when he comes home from work. 
 
i put my licorice laces and my milky bar in my special food box on the shelf, which father is not allowed 
to touch because it is mine. 
 
then father said, "and what have you been up to, young man?" 
 
and i said, "i went to the shop to get some licorice laces and a milky bar." 
 
and he said, "you were a long time." 
 
and  i  said,  "i  talked  to  mrs.  alexander's  dog  outside  the  shop.  and  i  stroked  him  and  he  sniffed  my 
trousers." which was another white lie. 
 
then rhodri said to me, "god, you do get the third degree, don't you." 
 
but i didn't know what the third degree was. 
 
and he said, "so, how are you doing, captain?" 
 
and i said, "i'm doing very well, thank you," which is what you're meant to say. 
 
and he said, "what's 251 times 864?" 
 
and i thought about this and i said,"216,864." because it was a really easy sum because you just multiply 
864 x 1,000,which is 864,000. then you divide it by 4, which is 216,000, and that's 250 x 864. then you 
just add another 864 onto it to get 251 x 864. and that's 216,864. 
 
and i said, "is that right?" 
 
and rhodri said, "i haven't got a bloody clue," and he laughed. 
 
i don't like it when rhodri laughs at me. rhodri laughs at me a lot. father says it is being friendly. 
 
then father said, "i'll stick one of those gobi aloo sag things in the oven for you, ok?" 
 
this is because i like indian food because it has a strong taste. but gobi aloo sag is yellow, so i put red 
food coloring into it before i eat it. and i keep a little plastic bottle of this in my special food box. 
 
and i said, "ok." 
 
and rhodri said, "so, it looks like parky stitched them up, then?" but this was to father, not to me. 
 
and father said, "well, those circuit boards looked like they'd come out of the bloody ark." 
 

and rhodri said, "you going to tell them?" 
 
and father said, "what's the point? they're hardly going to take him to court, are they?" 
 
and rhodri said, "that'll be the day." 
 
and father said, "best to let sleeping dogs lie, i reckon." 
 
then i went into the garden. 
 
siobhan said that when you are writing a book you have to include some descriptions of things. i said that 
i could take photographs and put them in the book. but she said the idea of a book was to describe things 
using words so that people could read them and make a picture in their own head. 
 
and she said it was best to describe things that were interesting or different. 
 
she also said that i should describe people in the story by mentioning one or two details about them so 
that people could make a picture of them in their head. which is why i wrote about mr. jeavons's shoes 
with all the holes in them and the policeman who looked as if he had two mice in his nose and the thing 
rhodri smelled of but i didn't know the name for. 
 
so i decided to do a description of the garden. but the garden wasn't very interesting or different. it was 
just a garden, with grass and a shed and a clothesline. but the sky was interesting and different because 
usually skies look boring because they are all blue or all gray or all covered in one pattern of clouds and 
they  don't  look  like  they  are  hundreds  of  miles  above  your  head.  they  look  like  someone  might  have 
painted them on a big roof. but this sky had lots of different types of clouds in it at different heights, so 
you could see how big it was and this made it look enormous. 
 
furthest away in the sky were lots of little white clouds which looked like fish scales or sand dunes which 
had a very regular pattern. 
 
then  next  furthest  away  and  to  the  west  were  some  big  clouds  which  were  colored  slightly  orange 
because it was nearly evening and the sun was going down. 
 
then closest to the ground was a huge cloud which was colored gray because it was a rain cloud. and it 
was a big pointy shape and it looked like this 
 

 
 
and  when  i  looked  at  it  for  a  long  time  i  could  see  it  moving  very  slowly  and  it  was  like  an  alien 
spaceship hundreds of kilometers long, like in dune or blake's 7 or close encounters of the third kind, 
except that it wasn't made of solid material, it was made of droplets of condensed water vapor, which is 
what clouds are made of. 

 

 
and it could have been an alien spaceship. 
 
people  think that  alien  spaceships  would  be  solid  and  made  of  metal  and  have  lights  all  over  them  and 
move slowly through the sky because that is how we would build a spaceship if we were able to build one 
that  big.  but  aliens,  if  they  exist,  would  probably  be  very  different  from  us.  they  might  look  like  big 
slugs, or be flat like reflections. or they might be bigger than planets. or they might not have bodies at 
all. they might just be information, like in a computer. and their spaceships might look like clouds, or be 
made up of unconnected objects like dust or leaves. 
 
then i listened to the sounds in the garden and i could hear a bird singing and i could hear traffic noise 
which  was  like  the  surf  on  a  beach  and  i  could  hear  someone  playing  music  somewhere  and  children 
shouting. and in between these noises, if i listened very carefully and stood completely still, i could hear 
a tiny whining noise inside my ears and the air going in and out of my nose. 
 
then  i  sniffed  the  air  to  see  if  i  could  see  what  the  air  in  the  garden  smelled  like.  but  i  couldn't  smell 
anything. it smelled of nothing. and this was interesting, too. 
 
then i went inside and fed toby. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

107: 

the hound of the baskervilles is my favorite book. 
 
in the hound of the baskervilles, sherlock holmes and doctor watson get a visit from james mortimer, 
who is a doctor from the moors in devon. james mortimer's friend, sir charles baskerville, has died of a 
heart attack and james mortimer thinks that he might have been scared to death. james mortimer also has 
an ancient scroll which describes the curse of the baskervilles. 
 
on this scroll it says that sir charles baskerville had an ancestor called sir hugo baskerville, who was a 
wild, profane and godless man. and he tried to do sex with a daughter of a yeoman, but she escaped and 
he chased her across the moor. and his friends, who were daredevil roisterers, chased after him. 
 
and when they found him, the daughter of the yeoman had died of exhaustion and fatigue. and they saw 
a great black beast, shaped like a hound yet larger than any hound that ever mortal eye has rested on, and 
this hound was tearing the throat out of sir hugo baskerville. and one of the friends died of fear that very 
night and the other two were broken men for the rest of their days. 
 
james mortimer thinks that the hound of the baskervilles might have scared sir charles to death and he 
is  worried  that  his  son  and  heir,  sir  henry  baskerville,  will  be  in  danger  when  he  goes  to  the  hall  in 
devon. 
 
so  sherlock  holmes  sends  doctor  watson  to  devon  with  sir  henry  baskerville  and  james  mortimer. 
and  doctor  watson  tries  to  work  out  who  might  have  killed  sir  charles  baskerville.  and  sherlock 
holmes says he will stay in london, but he travels to devon secretly and does investigations of his own. 
 
and  sherlock  holmes  finds  out  that  sir  charles  was  killed  by  a  neighbor  called  stapleton  who  is  a 
butterfly collector and a distant relation of the baskervilles. and stapleton is poor, so he tries to kill sir 
henry baskerville so that he will inherit the hall. 
 
in order to do this he has brought a huge dog from london and covered it in phosphorus to make it glow 
in the dark, and it was this dog which scared sir charles baskerville to death. and sherlock holmes and 
watson  and  lestrade  from  scotland  yard catch him.  and sherlock  holmes  and  watson  shoot  the  dog, 
which is one of the dogs which gets killed in the story, which is not nice because it is not the dog's fault. 
and stapleton escapes into the grimpen mire, which is part of the moor, and he dies because he is sucked 
into a bog. 
 
there  are  some  bits  of  the  story  i  don't  like.  one  bit  is  the  ancient  scroll  because  it  is  written  in  old 
language which is difficult to understand, like this 
 
 
learn then from this story not to fear the fruits of the past, but rather to be circumspect in the future, that 
those  foul  passions  whereby  our  family  has  suffered  so  grievously  may  not  again  be  loosed  to  our 
undoing. 
 
 
and sometimes sir arthur conan doyle (who is the author) describes people like this 
 
 
there was something subtly wrong with the face, some coarseness of expression, some hardness, perhaps 
of eye, some looseness of lip which marred its perfect beauty. 
 
and i don't know what some hardness, perhaps of eye means, and i'm not interested in faces. 

 
but sometimes it is fun not knowing what the words mean because you can look them up in a dictionary, 
like goyal (which is a deep dip) or tors (which are hills or rocky heights). 
 
i like the hound of the baskervilles because it is a detective story, which means that there are clues and 
red herrings. 
 
these are some of the clues 

1.  two  of  sir  henry  baskerville's  boots  go  missing  when  he  is  staying  at  a  hotel  in  london. 
this  means  that  someone  wants  to  give  them  to  the  hound  of  the  baskervilles  to  smell,  like  a 
bloodhound,  so  that  it  can  chase  him.  this  means  that  the  hound  of  the  baskervilles  is  not  a 
supernatural being but a real dog.  

2.  stapleton is the only person who knows how to get through the grimpen mire and he tells 
watson to stay out of it for his own safety. this means that he is hiding something in the middle 
of the grimpen mire and doesn't want anyone else to find it.  

3.  mrs.  stapleton  tells  doctor  watson  to  "go  straight  back  to  london  instantly."  this  is 
because she thinks doctor watson is sir henry baskerville and she knows that her husband wants 
to kill him.  

and these are some of the red herrings 

1.  sherlock  holmes  and  watson  are  followed  when  they  are  in  london  by  a  man  in  a  coach 
with  a  black  beard.  this  makes  you  think  that  the  man  is  barrymore,  who  is  the  caretaker  at 
baskerville hall, because he is the only other person who has a black beard. but the man is really 
stapleton, who is wearing a false beard.  

2.  selden, the netting hill murderer. this is a man who has escaped from a prison nearby and is 
being  hunted  down  on  the  moors,  which  makes  you  think  that  he  has  something  to  do  with  the 
story, because he is a criminal, but he hasn't anything to do with the story at all.  

3.  the man on the tor. this is a silhouette of a man that doctor watson sees on the moor at night 
and doesn't recognize, which makes you think it is the murderer. but it is sherlock holmes who 
has come to devon secretly.  

 
i  also  like  the  hound  of  the  baskervilles  because  i  like  sherlock  holmes  and  i  think  that  if  i  were  a 
proper detective he is the kind of detective i would be. he is very intelligent and he solves the mystery 
and he says 

the world is full of obvious things which nobody by any chance ever observes. 

but he notices them, like i do. also it says in the book 

sherlock holmes had, in a very remarkable degree, the power of detaching his mind at will. 

and this is like me, too, because if i get really interested in something, like practicing maths, or reading a 
book  about  the  apollo  missions  or  great  white  sharks,  i  don't  notice  anything  else  and  father  can  be 
calling me to come and eat my supper and i won't hear him. and this is why i am very good at playing 
chess, because i detach my mind at will and concentrate on the board and after a while the person i am 
playing will stop concentrating and start scratching their nose, or staring out of the window, and then they 
will make a mistake and i will win. 

also doctor watson says about sherlock holmes 

his mind... was busy in endeavouring to frame some scheme into which all these strange and apparently 
disconnected episodes could be fitted. 

and that is what i am trying to do by writing this book. 

also  sherlock  holmes  doesn't  believe  in  the  supernatural,  which  is  god  and  fairy  tales  and  hounds  of 
hell and curses, which are stupid things. 

and i am going to finish this chapter with two interesting facts about sherlock holmes 

1.  in  the  original  sherlock  holmes  stories  sherlock  holmes  is  never  described  as  wearing  a 
deerstalker hat, which is what he is always wearing in pictures and cartoons. the deerstalker hat 
was invented by a man called sidney paget, who did the illustrations for the original books.  

2.  in  the  original  sherlock  holmes  stories  sherlock  holmes  never  says  "elementary,  my  dear 

watson." he only ever says this in films and on the television.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

109: 

 
that  night  i  wrote  some  more  of  my  book,  and  the  next  morning  i  took  it  into  school  so  that  siobhan 
could read it and tell me if i had made mistakes with the spelling and the grammar. 
 
siobhan  read  the  book  during  morning  break  when  she  has  a  cup  of  coffee  and  sits  at  the  edge  of  the 
playground with the other teachers. and after morning break she came and sat down next to me and said 
she had read the bit about my conversation with mrs. alexander and she said, "have you told your father 
about this?" 
 
and i replied, "no." 
 
and she said, "are you going to tell your father about this?" 
 
and i replied, "no." 
 
and she said, "good. i think that's a good idea, christopher." and then she said, "did it make you sad to 
find this out?" 
 
and i asked, "find what out?" 
 
and she said, "did it make you upset to find out that your mother and mr. shears had an affair?" 
 
and i said, "no." 
 
and she said, "are you telling the truth, christopher?" 
 
and then i said, "i always tell the truth." 
 
and she said, "i know you do, christopher. but sometimes we get sad about things and we don't like to 
tell other people that we are sad about them. we like to keep it a secret. or sometimes we are sad but we 
don't really know we are sad. so we say we aren't sad. but really we are." 
 
and i said, "i'm not sad." 
 
and she said, "if you do start to feel sad about this, i want you to know that you can come and talk to me 
about it. because i think talking to me will help you feel less sad. and if you don't feel sad but you just 
want to talk to me about it, that would be ok, too. do you understand?" 
 
and i said, "i understand." 
 
and she said, "good." 
 
and i replied, "but i don't feel sad about it. because mother is dead. and because mr. shears isn't around 
anymore. so i would be feeling sad about something that isn't real and doesn't exist. and that would be 
stupid." 
 
and then i practiced maths for the rest of the morning and at lunch i didn't have the quiche because it was 
yellow,  but  i  did  have  the  carrots  and  the  peas  and  lots  of  tomato  ketchup.  and  for  afters  i  had  some 
blackberry and apple crumble, but not the crumble bit because that was yellow, too, and i got mrs. davis 
to take the  crumble bit  off before she put  it onto  my plate  because it doesn't  matter if different sorts of 
food are touching before they are actually on your plate. 
 

then, after lunch, i spent the afternoon doing art with mrs. peters and i painted some pictures of aliens 
which looked like this 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

113: 

 
my memory is like a film. that is why i am really good at remembering things, like the conversations i 
have written down in this book, and what people were wearing, and what they smelled like, because my 
memory has a smelltrack which is like a soundtrack. 
 
and  when  people  ask  me  to  remember  something  i  can  simply  press  rewind  and  fast  forward  and 
pause  like  on  a  video  recorder,  but  more  like  a  dvd  player  because  i  don't  have  to  rewind  through 
everything in between to get to a memory of something a long time ago. and there are no buttons, either, 
because it is happening in my head. 
 
if someone says to me, "christopher, tell me what your mother was like," i can rewind to lots of different 
scenes and say what she was like in those scenes. 
 
for example, i could rewind to 4 july 1992 when i was 9 years old, which was a saturday, and we were 
on holiday in cornwall and in the afternoon we were on the beach in a place called polperro. and mother 
was wearing a pair of shorts made out of denim and a light blue bikini top and she was smoking cigarettes 
called consulate which were mint flavor. and she wasn't swimming. mother was sunbathing on a towel 
which  had  red  and  purple  stripes  and  she  was  reading  a  book  by  georgette  heyer  called  the 
masqueraders. and then she finished sunbathing and went into the water to swim and she said, "bloody 
nora, it's cold." and she said i should come and swim, too, but i don't like swimming because i don't like 
taking my clothes off. and she said i should just roll up my trousers and walk into the water a little way, 
so i did. and i stood in the water. and mother said, "look. it's lovely." and she jumped backward and 
disappeared under the water and i thought a shark had eaten her and i screamed and she stood up out of 
the water again and came over to where i was standing and held up her right hand and spread her fingers 
out in a fan and said, "come on, christopher, touch my hand. come on now. stop screaming. touch my 
hand. listen to me, christopher. you can do it." and after a while i stopped screaming and i held up my 
left hand and spread my fingers out in a fan and we made our fingers and thumbs touch each other and 
mother said, "it's ok, christopher. it's ok. there aren't any sharks in cornwall," and then i felt better. 
 
except i can't remember anything before i was about 4 because i wasn't looking at things in the right way 
before then, so they didn't get recorded properly. 
 
and this is how i recognize someone if i don't know who they are. i see what they are wearing, or if they 
have a walking stick, or funny hair, or a certain type of glasses, or they have a particular way of moving 
their arms, and i do a search through my memories to see if i have met them before. 
 
and this is also how i know how to act in difficult situations when i don't know what to do. 
 
for example, if people say things which don't make sense, like, "see you later, alligator," or "you'll catch 
your death in that," i do a search and see if i have ever heard someone say this before. 
 
and  if  someone  is  lying  on  the  floor  at  school,  i  do  a  search  through  my  memory  to  find  a  picture  of 
someone having an epileptic fit and then i compare the picture with what is happening in front of me so i 
can decide whether they are just lying down and playing a game, or having a sleep, or whether they are 
having an epileptic fit. and if they are having an epileptic fit, i move any furniture out of the way to stop 
them from banging their head and i take my jumper off and i put it underneath their head and i go and 
find a teacher. 
 
other people have pictures in their heads, too. but they are different because the pictures in my head are 
all pictures of things which really happened. but other people have pictures in their heads of things which 
aren't real and didn't happen. 
 

for example, sometimes mother used to say, "if i hadn't married your father i think i'd be living in a little 
farmhouse  in  the  south  of  france  with  someone  called  jean.  and  he'd  be,  ooh,  a  local  handyman.  you 
know,  doing  painting  and  decorating  for  people,  gardening,  building  fences.  and  we'd  have  a  veranda 
with figs growing over it and there would be a field of sunflowers at the bottom of the garden and a little 
town  on  the  hill  in  the  distance  and  we'd  sit  outside  in  the  evening  and  drink  red  wine  and  smoke 
gauloises cigarettes and watch the sun go down." 
 
and  siobhan  once  said  that  when  she  felt  depressed  or  sad  she  would  close  her  eyes  and  she  would 
imagine that she was staying in a house on cape cod with her friend elly, and they would take a trip on a 
boat from provincetown and go out  into  the bay to watch the humpback whales  and that  made  her feel 
calm and peaceful and happy. 
 
and sometimes, when someone has died, like mother died, people say, "what would you want to say to 
your  mother  if  she  was  here  now?"  or  "what  would  your  mother  think  about  that?"  which  is  stupid 
because mother is dead and you can't say anything to people who are dead and dead people can't think. 
 
and  grandmother  has  pictures  in  her  head,  too,  but  her  pictures  are  all  confused,  like  someone  has 
muddled the film up and she can't  tell what happened in what order, so she thinks  that dead people  are 
still  alive  and  she  doesn't  know  whether  something  happened  in  real  life  or  whether  it  happened  on 
television. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

127: 

 
when i got home from school father was still out at work, so i unlocked the front door and went inside 
and took my coat off. i went into the kitchen and put my things on the table. and one of the things was 
this book which i had taken into school to show to siobhan. i made  myself a raspberry milk shake and 
heated it up in the microwave and then went through to the living room to watch one of my blue planet 
videos about life in the deepest parts of the ocean. 
 
the video was about the sea creatures who live around sulfur chimneys, which are underwater volcanoes 
where  gases  are  ejected  from  the  earth's  crust  into  the  water.  scientists  never  expected  there  to  be  any 
living organisms there because it was so hot and so poisonous, but there are whole ecosystems there. 
 
i like this bit because it shows you that there is always something new that science can discover, and all 
the facts that you take for granted can be completely wrong. and also i like the fact that they are filming 
in a place which is harder to get to than the top of mount everest but is only a few miles away from sea 
level. and it is one of the quietest and darkest and most secret places on the surface of the earth. and i 
like imagining that i am there sometimes, in a spherical metal submersible with windows that are 50 cm 
thick to stop them from imploding under the pressure. and i imagine that i am the only person inside it, 
and  that  it  is  not  connected  to  a  ship  at  all  but  can  operate  under  its  own  power  and  i  can  control  the 
motors and move anywhere i want to on the seabed and i can never be found. 
 
father  came home at 5:48 p.m. i heard him  come  through the front door. then he  came  into the  living 
room. he was wearing a lime green and sky blue check shirt and there was a double knot on one of his 
shoes but not on the other. he was carrying an old advert for fussell's milk powder which was made of 
metal and painted with blue and white enamel and covered with little circles of rust which were like bullet 
holes, but he didn't explain why he was carrying this. 
 
he said, "howdy, pardner," which is a joke he does. 
 
and i said, "hello." 
 
i carried on watching the video and father went into the kitchen. 
 
i had forgotten that i had left my book lying on the kitchen table because i was too interested in the blue 
planet video. this is what is called relaxing your guard, and it is what you must never do if you are a 
detective. 
 
it was 5:54 p.m. when father came back into the living room. he said, "what is this?" but he said it very 
quietly and i didn't realize that he was angry because he wasn't shouting. 
 
he was holding the book in his right hand. 
 
i said, "it's a book i'm writing." 
 
and he said, "is this true? did you talk to mrs. alexander?" he said this very quietly as well, so i still 
didn't realize that he was angry. 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
then he said, "holy fucking jesus, christopher. how stupid are you?" 
 

this is what siobhan says is called a rhetorical question. it has a question mark at the end, but you are not 
meant to answer it because the person who is asking it already knows the answer. it is difficult to spot a 
rhetorical question. 
 
then father said, "what the fuck did i tell you, christopher?" this was much louder. 
 
and  i  replied,  "not  to  mention  mr.  shears's  name  in  our  house.  and  not  to  go  asking  mrs.  shears,  or 
anyone,  about  who  killed  that  bloody  dog.  and  not  to  go  trespassing  in  other  people's  gardens.  and  to 
stop this ridiculous bloody detective game. except i haven't done any of those things. i just asked mrs. 
alexander about mr. shears because -- " 
 
but father interrupted me and said, "don't give me that bollocks, you little shit. you knew exactly what 
you were bloody doing. i've read the book, remember." and when he said this he held up the book and 
shook it. "what else did i say, christopher?" 
 
i thought that this might be another rhetorical question, but i wasn't sure. i found it hard to work out what 
to say because i was starting to get scared and confused. 
 
then father repeated the question, "what else did i say, christopher?" 
 
i said, "i don't know." 
 
and he said, "come on. you're the fucking memory man." 
 
but i couldn't think. 
 
and father said, "not to go around sticking your fucking nose into other people's business. and what do 
you do? you go around sticking your nose into other people's business. you go around raking up the past 
and  sharing  it  with  every  tom,  dick  and  harry  you  bump  into.  what  am  i  going  to  do  with  you, 
christopher? what the fuck am i going to do with you?" 
 
i said, "i was just doing chatting with mrs. alexander. i wasn't doing investigating." 
 
and he said, "i ask you to do one thing for me, christopher. one thing." 
 
and i said, "i didn't want to talk to mrs. alexander. it was mrs. alexander who --" 
 
but father interrupted me and grabbed hold of my arm really hard. 
 
father had never grabbed hold of me like that before. mother had hit me sometimes because she was a 
very  hot-tempered  person,  which  means  that  she  got  angry  more  quickly  than  other  people  and  she 
shouted  more  often.  but  father  was  a  more  levelheaded  person,  which  means  he  didn't  get  angry  as 
quickly and he didn't shout as often. so i was very surprised when he grabbed me. 
 
i  don't  like  it  when  people  grab  me.  and  i  don't  like  being  surprised  either.  so  i  hit  him,  like  i  hit  the 
policeman when he took hold of my arms and lifted me onto my feet. but father didn't let go, and he was 
shouting. and i hit him again. and then i didn't know what i was doing anymore. 
 
i had no memories for a short while. i know it was a short while because i checked my watch afterward. it 
was like someone had switched me off and then switched me on again. and when they switched me on 
again i was sitting on the carpet with my back against the wall and there was blood on my right hand and 
the side of my head was hurting. and father was standing on the carpet a meter in front of me looking 
down at me and he was still holding my book in his right hand, but it was bent in half and all the corners 

were  messed  up,  and  there  was  a  scratch  on  his  neck  and  a  big  rip  in  the  sleeve  of  his  green  and  blue 
check shirt and he was breathing really deeply. 
 
after about a minute he turned and walked through to the kitchen. then he unlocked the back door into 
the garden and went outside. i heard him lift the lid of the dustbin and drop something into it and put the 
lid of the dustbin back on. then he came into the kitchen again, but he wasn't carrying the book anymore. 
then he locked the back door again and put the key into the little china jug that is shaped like a fat nun 
and he stood in the middle of the kitchen and closed his eyes. 
 
then he opened his eyes and he said, "i need a fucking drink." 
 
and he got himself a can of beer. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
these are some of the reasons why i hate yellow and brown 

yellow 

131: 

1.  custard  
2.  bananas (bananas also turn brown)  
3.  double yellow lines  
4.  yellow  fever  (which  is  a  disease  from  tropical  america  and  west  africa  which  causes  a  high 
fever, acute nephritis, jaundice and hemorrhages, and it is caused by a virus transmitted by the bite 
of a mosquito called aedes aegypti, which used to be called stegomyia fasciata; and nephritis is 
inflammation of the kidneys)  

5.  yellow flowers (because i get hay fever from flower pollen, which is one of 3 sorts of hay fever, 

and the others are from grass pollen and fungus pollen, and it makes me feel ill)  

6.  sweet corn (because it comes out in your poo and you don't digest it so you are not really meant 

to eat it, like grass or leaves)  

brown 

1.  dirt  
2.  gravy  
3.  poo  
4.  wood (because people used to make machines and vehicles out of wood, but they don't anymore 
because  wood  breaks  and  goes  rotten  and  has  worms  in  it  sometimes,  and  now  people  make 
machines and vehicles out of metal and plastic, which are much better and more modern)  

5.  melissa brown (who is a girl at school, who is not actually brown like anil or mohammed, it's 
just  her  name,  but  she  tore  my  big  astronaut  painting  into  two  pieces  and  i  threw  it  away  even 
after mrs. peters sellotaped it together again because it looked broken)  

 
mrs. forbes said that hating yellow and brown is just being silly. and siobhan said that she shouldn't say 
things like that and everyone has favorite colors. and siobhan was right. but mrs. forbes was a bit right, 
too. because it is sort of being silly. but in life you have to take lots of decisions and if you don't take 
decisions you would never do anything because you would spend all your time choosing between things 
you could do. so it is good to have a reason why you hate some things and you like others. it is like being 
in a restaurant like when father takes me out to a berni inn sometimes and you look at the menu and you 
have  to  choose  what  you  are  going  to  have.  but  you  don't  know  if  you  are  going  to  like  something 
because you haven't tasted it yet, so you have favorite foods and you choose these, and you have foods 
you don't like and you don't choose these, and then it is simple. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

137: 

 
the next day father said he was sorry that he had hit me and he didn't mean to. he made me wash the cut 
on my cheek with dettol to  make sure that it wasn't infected, then he got  me to put a plaster on it so it 
didn't bleed. 
 
then, because it was saturday, he said he was going to take me on an expedition to show me that he was 
properly sorry, and we were going to twycross zoo. so he made me some sandwiches with white bread 
and tomatoes and lettuce and ham and strawberry jam for me to eat because i don't like eating food from 
places i don't know. and he said it would be ok because there wouldn't be too many people at the zoo 
because it was forecast to rain, and i was glad about that because i don't like crowds of people and i like it 
when it is raining. so i went and got my waterproof, which is orange. 
 
then we drove to twycross zoo. 
 
i had never been to twycross zoo before so i didn't have a route worked out in my mind before we got 
there, so we bought a guidebook from the  information  center and  then  we walked round the whole  zoo 
and i decided which were my favorite animals. 
 
my favorite animals were 

1.  randyman,  which  is  the  name  of  the  oldest  red-faced  black  spider  monkey  (ateles 
paniscus  paniscus)  ever  kept  in  captivity.  randyman  is  44  years  old,  which  is  the  same  age  as 
father.  he  used  to  be  a  pet  on  a  ship  and  have  a  metal  band  round  his  stomach,  like  in  a  story 
about pirates.  

2.  the patagonian sea lions, which are called miracle and star.  
3.  maliku,  which  is  an  orangutan.  i  liked  it  especially  because  it  was  lying  in  a  kind  of 
hammock made out of a pair of stripy green pajama bottoms and on the blue plastic notice next to 
the cage it said it made the hammock itself.  

then we went to the café and father had plaice and chips and apple pie and ice cream and a pot of earl 
grey tea and i had my sandwiches and i read the guidebook to the zoo. 
 
and father said, "i love you very much, christopher. don't ever forget that. and i know i lose my rag 
occasionally. i know i get angry. i know i shout. and i know i shouldn't. but i only do it because i worry 
about you, because i don't want to see you getting into trouble, because i don't want you to get hurt. do 
you understand?" 
 
i didn't know whether i understood. so i said, "i don't know." 
 
and father said, "christopher, do you understand that i love you?" 
 
and i said "yes," because loving someone is helping them when they get into trouble, and looking after 
them,  and  telling  them  the  truth,  and  father  looks  after  me  when  i  get  into  trouble,  like  coming  to  the 
police station, and he looks after  me by cooking  meals for  me,  and he  always tells  me  the  truth, which 
means that he loves me. 
 
and  then  he  held  up  his  right  hand  and  spread  his  fingers out  in  a  fan,  and  i  held  up  my  left  hand  and 
spread my fingers out in a fan and we made our fingers and thumbs touch each other. 
 
then i got out a piece of paper from my bag and i did a map of the zoo from memory as a test. the map 
was like this 
 

 
 

10, 11 

 

 
then we went and looked at the giraffes. and the smell of their poo was like the smell inside the gerbil 
cage at school when we had gerbils, and when they ran their legs were so long it looked like they were 
running in slow motion. 
 
then father said we had to get home before the roads got busy. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

139: 

i  like  sherlock  holmes,  but  i  do  not  like  sir  arthur  conan doyle, who  was the  author  of  the  sherlock 
holmes stories. that is because he wasn't like sherlock holmes and he believed in the supernatural. and 
when he got old he joined the spiritualist society, which meant that he believed you could communicate 
with the dead. this was because his son died of influenza during the first world war and he still wanted 
to talk to him. 
 
and in 1917 something famous happened called the case of the cottingley fairies. two cousins called 
frances griffiths, who was 9 years old, and elsie wright, who was 16 years old, said they used to play 
with  fairies  by  a  stream  called  cottingley  beck  and  they  used  frances's  father's  camera  to  take  5 
photographs of the fairies like this 
 

 
but they weren't real fairies. they were drawings on pieces of paper that they cut out and stood up with 
pins, because elsie was a really good artist. 
 
harold snelling, who was an expert in fake photography, said 

 

these  dancing  figures  are  not  made  of  paper  nor  any  fabric;  they  are  not  painted  on  a  photographic 
background -- but what gets me most is that all these figures have moved during the exposure. 

but he was being stupid because paper would move during an exposure, and the exposure was very long 
because in the photograph you can see a little waterfall in the background and it is blurred. 

then sir arthur conan doyle heard about the pictures and he said he believed they were real in an article 
in a magazine called the strand. but he was being stupid, too, because if you look at the pictures you can 
see that the fairies look just like fairies in old books and they have wings and dresses and tights and shoes, 
which is like aliens landing on earth and being like daleks from doctor who or imperial stormtroopers 
from the death star in star wars or little green men like in cartoons of aliens. 
 
and in 1981 a man called joe cooper interviewed elsie wright and frances griffiths for an article in a 
magazine called the unexplained and elsie wright said all 5 photographs had been faked and frances 
griffiths said 4 had been faked but one was real. and they said elsie had drawn the fairies from a book 
called princess mary's gift book by arthur shepperson. 
 
and this shows that sometimes people want to be stupid and they do not want to know the truth. 
 

 
and  it  shows  that  something  called  occam's  razor  is  true.  and  occam's  razor  is  not  a  razor  that  men 
shave with but a law, and it says 

entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem. 

which is latin and it means 

no more things should be presumed to exist than are absolutely necessary. 

which means that a murder victim is usually killed by someone known to them and fairies are made out 
of paper and you can't talk to someone who is dead. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

149: 

 
when i went to school on monday, siobhan asked me why i had a bruise on the side of my face. i said 
that father was angry and he had grabbed  me so i had hit  him  and  then we had  a  fight. siobhan  asked 
whether father had hit me and i said i didn't know because i got very cross and it made my memory go 
strange. and then she asked if father had hit me because he was angry. and i said he didn't hit me, he 
grabbed me, but he was angry. and siobhan asked if he grabbed me hard, and i said that he had grabbed 
me  hard.  and  siobhan  asked  if  i  was  frightened  about  going  home,  and  i  said  i  wasn't.  and  then  she 
asked me if i wanted to talk about it anymore, and i said that i didn't. and then she said, "ok," and we 
didn't talk about it anymore, because grabbing is ok if it is on your arm or your shoulder when you are 
angry, but you can't grab someone's hair or their face. but hitting is not allowed, except if you are already 
in a fight with someone, then it is not so bad. 
 
and when i got home from school father was still at work, so i went into the kitchen and took the key out 
of the little china jug shaped like a nun and opened the back door and went outside and looked inside the 
dustbin to find my book. 
 
i  wanted  to  get  my  book  back  because  i  liked  writing  it.  i  liked  having  a  project  to  do  and  i  liked  it 
especially if it was a difficult project like a book. also i still didn't know who had killed wellington and 
my book was where i had kept all the clues that i had discovered and i did not want them to be thrown 
away. 
 
but my book wasn't in the dustbin. 
 
i put the lid back on the dustbin and walked down the garden to have a look in the bin where father keeps 
the garden waste, such as lawn clippings and apples that have fallen off the trees, but my book wasn't in 
there either. 
 
i wondered if father had put it into his van and driven to the tip and put it into one of the big bins there, 
but i did not want that to be true because then i would never see it again. 
 
one  other  possibility was  that  father  had  hidden  my book  somewhere  in  the  house.  so  i  decided  to  do 
some detecting and see if i could find it. except i had to keep listening really hard all the time so i would 
hear his van when he pulled up outside the house so he wouldn't catch me being a detective. 
 
i started by looking in the kitchen. my book was approximately 25 cm x 35 cm x 1 cm so it couldn't be 
hidden in a very small place, which meant that i didn't have to look in any really small places. i looked on 
top of the cupboards and down the back of drawers and under the oven and i used my special mag-lite 
torch and a piece of  mirror from the utility room to help  me see into the dark spaces at the back of the 
cupboards where the mice used to get in from the garden and have their babies. 
 
then i detected in the utility room. 
 
then i detected in the dining room. 
 
then i detected  in the  living room,  where i found the  missing wheel from  my airfix messerschmitt  bf 
109 g-6 model under the sofa. 
 
then i thought i heard father coming through the front door and i jumped and i tried to stand up fast and 
i banged my knee on the corner of the coffee table and it hurt a lot, but it was only one of the drug people 
next door dropping something on the floor. 
 

then  i  went  upstairs,  but  i  didn't  do  any  detecting  in  my  own  room  because  i  reasoned  that  father 
wouldn't  hide  something  from  me  in  my  own  room  unless  he  was  being  very  clever  and  doing  what  is 
called a double blufflike in a real murder mystery novel, so i decided to look in my own room only if i 
couldn't find the book anywhere else. 
 
i detected in the bathroom, but the only place to look was in the airing cupboard and there was nothing in 
there. 
 
which  meant that the only room left to detect in was father's bedroom. i didn't know whether i should 
look in there because he had told me before not to mess with anything in his room. but if he was going to 
hide something from me, the best place to hide it would be in his room. 
 
so i told myself i would not mess with things in his room. i would move them and then i would move 
them back. and he would never know i had done it so he wouldn't be angry. 
 
i started by looking under the bed. there were 7 shoes and a comb with lots of hair in it and a piece of 
copper  pipe  and  a  chocolate  biscuit  and  a  porn  magazine  called  fiesta  and  a  dead  bee  and  a  homer 
simpson pattern tie and a wooden spoon, but not my book. 
 
then i looked in the drawers on either side of the dressing table, but these only contained aspirin and nail 
clippers and batteries and dental floss and a tampon and tissues and a spare false tooth in case father lost 
the false tooth he had to fill the gap where he knocked a tooth out when he fell off the ladder putting a 
bird box up in the garden, but my book wasn't in there either. 
 
then i looked in his clothes cupboard. this was full of his clothes on hangers. there was also a little shelf 
at the top which i could see onto if i stood on the bed, but i had to take my shoes off in case i left a dirty 
footprint  that  would  be  a  clue  if  father  decided  to  do  some  detecting.  but  the  only  things  on  the  shelf 
were more porn magazines and a broken sandwich toaster and 12 wire coat hangers and an old hair dryer 
that used to belong to mother. 
 
in the bottom of the cupboard was a large plastic toolbox which was full of tools for doing do it yourself, 
like  a drill and a paintbrush and some screws and a hammer, but i could see  these  without opening the 
box because it was made of transparent gray plastic. 
 
then i saw that there was another box underneath the toolbox, so i lifted the toolbox out of the cupboard. 
the  other  box  was  an  old  cardboard  box  that  is  called  a  shirt  box  because  people  used  to  buy  shirts  in 
them. and when i opened the shirt box i saw my book was inside it. 
 
then i didn't know what to do. 
 
i was happy because father hadn't thrown  my book away. but if i took the book he would know i had 
been messing with things in his room and he would be very angry and i had promised not to mess with 
things in his room. 
 
then i heard his van pulling up outside the house and i knew that i had to think fast and be clever. so i 
decided that i would leave the book where it was because i reasoned that father wasn't going to throw it 
away  if  he had  put  it  into  the shirt  box and  i  could  carry  on  writing in  another  book  that  i  would  keep 
really secret and then, maybe later, he might change his mind and let me have the first book back again 
and i could copy the new book into it. and if he never gave it back to me i would be able to remember 
most of what i had written, so i would put it all into the second secret book and if there were bits i wanted 
to check to make sure i had remembered them correctly i could come into his room when he was out and 
check. 
 
then i heard father shutting the door of the van. 

 
and that was when i saw the envelope. 
 
it  was  an  envelope  addressed  to  me  and  it  was  lying  under  my  book  in  the  shirt  box  with  some  other 
envelopes. i picked it up. it had never been opened. it said 

christopher boone  
36 randolph street  
swindon  
wiltshire 

then i noticed that there were lots of other envelopes and they were all addressed to  me. and this was 
interesting and confusing. 
 
and then i noticed how the words christopher and swindon were written. they were written like this 
 

 

 
 
i only know 3 people who do little circles instead of dots over the letter i. and one of them is siobhan, 
and one of them was mr. loxely, who used to teach at the school, and one of them was mother. 
 
and then i heard father opening the front door, so i took one envelope from under the book and i put the 
lid  back  on  the  shirt  box  and  i  put  the  toolbox  back  on  top  of  it  and  i  closed  the  cupboard  door  really 
carefully. 
 
then father called out, "christopher?" 
 
i said nothing because he might be able to hear where i was calling from. i stood up and walked around 
the bed to the door, holding the envelope, trying to make as little noise as possible. 
 
father was standing at the bottom of the stairs and i thought he might see me, but he was flicking through 
the post which had come that morning so his head was pointing downward. then he walked away from 
the foot of the stairs toward the kitchen and i closed the door of his room very quietly and went into my 
own room. 
 
i wanted to look at the envelope but i didn't want to make father angry, so i hid the envelope underneath 
my mattress. then i walked downstairs and said hello to father. 
 
and he said, "so, what have you been up to today, young man?" 
 
and i said, "today we did life skills with mrs. gray. which was using money and public transport. 
and i had tomato soup for lunch, and 5 apples. and i practiced some maths in the afternoon and we went 
for a walk in the park with mrs. peters and collected leaves for making collages." 
 
and father said, "excellent, excellent. what do you fancy for chow tonight?" 
 

chow is food. 
 
i said i wanted baked beans and broccoli. 
 
and father said, "i think that can be very easily arranged." 
 
then i sat on the sofa and i read some more of the book i was reading called chaos by james gleick. 
 
then i went into the kitchen and had my baked beans and broccoli while father had sausages and eggs 
and fried bread and a mug of tea. 
 
then  father  said,  "i'm  going  to  put  those  shelves  up  in  the  living  room,  if  that's  all  right  with  you.  i'll 
make  a  bit  of  a  racket,  i'm  afraid,  so  if  you  want  to  watch  television  we're  going  to  have  to  shift  it 
upstairs." 
 
and i said, "i'll go and be on my own in my room." 
 
and he said, "good man." 
 
and i said, "thank you for supper," because that is being polite. 
 
and he said, "no problem, kiddo." 
 
and i went up to my room. 
 
and when i was in my room i shut the door and i took out the envelope from underneath my mattress. i 
held the letter up to the light to see if i could detect what was inside the envelope, but the paper of the 
envelope was too thick. i wondered whether i should open the envelope because it was something i had 
taken from father's room. but then i reasoned that it was addressed to me so it belonged to me so it was 
ok to open it. 
 
so i opened the envelope. 
 
inside there was a letter. 
 
and this was what was written in the letter 

 
451c chapter road  
wittesden  
london nw2 5ng  
0208 887 8907  

dear christopher, 

 
i'm sorry it's been such a very long time since i wrote my last letter to you. i've been very busy. i've got a 
new job working as a secretery for a factory that makes things out of steel. you'd like it a lot. the factory 
is  full  of  huge  machines  that  make  the  steel  and  cut  it  and  bend  it  into  watever  shapes  they  need.  this 
week they're making a roof for a cafe in a shopping centre in birmingham, it's shaped like a huge flower 
and they're going to stretch canvas over it to make it look like an enormus tent 
 
also we've moved into the new flat at last as you can see from the address. it's not as nice as the old one 
and i don't like willesden very much, but it's easier for roger to get to work and he's bought it (he only 
rented the other one), so we can get our own furnature and paint the walls the colour we want to. 
 

and  that's  why  it's  such  a  long  time  since  i  wrote  my  last  letter  to  you  because  it's  been  hard  work 
packing up all our things and then unpacking them and then getting used to this new job. 
 
i'm very tired now and i must go to sleep and i want to put this into the letterbox tomorrow morning, so 
i'll sign off now and write you another letter soon. 
 
you haven't written to me yet, so i know that you are probably still angry with me. i'm sorry christopher. 
but i still love you. i hope you don't stay angry with me forever. and i'd love it if you were able to write 
me a letter (but remember to send it to the new address!). 
 
i think about you all the time. 

 
lots of love, 
your mum 
xxxxxx 

then i was really confused because mother had never worked as a secretary for a firm that made things 
out  of  steel.  mother  had  worked  as a secretary for  a  big  garage  in  the  center  of  town.  and  mother  had 
never  lived  in  london.  mother  had  always  lived  with  us.  and  mother  had  never  written  a  letter  to  me 
before. 
 
there was no date on the letter so i couldn't work out when mother had written the letter and i wondered 
whether someone else had written the letter and pretended to be mother. 
 
and then i looked at the front of the envelope and i saw that there was a postmark and there was a date on 
the postmark and it was quite difficult to read, but it said 
 

 

 
which meant that the letter was posted on 16 october 1997, which was 18 months after mother had died. 
 
and then the door of my bedroom opened and father said, "what are you doing?" 
 
i said, "i'm reading a letter." 
 
and  he  said,  "i've  finished  the  drilling.  that  david  attenborough  nature  program's  on  telly  if  you're 
interested." 
 
i said, "ok." 
 
then he went downstairs again. 
 
i looked at the letter and thought really hard. it was a mystery and i couldn't work it out. perhaps the letter 
was in the wrong envelope and it had been written before mother had died. but why was she writing from 
london? the longest she had been  away was a week when she went  to visit her cousin ruth, who had 
cancer, but ruth lived in manchester. 
 

and then i thought that perhaps it wasn't a letter from mother. perhaps it was a letter to another person 
called christopher, from that christopher's mother. 
 
i was excited. when i started writing my book there was only one mystery i had to solve. now there were 
two. 
 
i decided that i would not think about it anymore that night because i didn't have enough information and 
could  easily  leap  to  the  wrong  conclusions  like  mr.  athelney  jones  of  scotland  yard,  which  is  a 
dangerous  thing  to  do  because  you  should  make  sure  you  have  all  the  available  clues  before  you  start 
deducing things. that way you are much less likely to make a mistake. 
 
i decided that i would wait until father was out of the house. then i would go into the cupboard in his 
bedroom and look at the other letters and see who they were from and what they said. 
 
i  folded  the  letter  and  hid  it  under  my  mattress  in  case  father  found  it  and  got  cross.  then  i  went 
downstairs and watched the television. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

151: 

 
lots of things are mysteries. but that doesn't mean there isn't an answer to them. it's just that scientists 
haven't found the answer yet. 
 
for example, some people believe in the ghosts of people who have come back from the dead. and uncle 
terry said that he saw a ghost in a shoe shop in a shopping center in northampton because he was going 
down into the basement when he saw someone dressed in gray walk across the bottom of the stairs. but 
when he got to the bottom of the stairs the basement was empty and there were no doors. 
 
when he told the lady on the till upstairs, they said it was called tuck and he was a ghost of a franciscan 
friar who used to live in the monastery which was on the same site hundreds of years ago, which was why 
the shopping center was called greyfriars shopping center, and they were used to him and not 
frightened at all. 
 
eventually scientists will discover something that explains ghosts, just like they discovered electricity, 
which explained lightning, and it might be something about people's brains, or something about the 
earth's magnetic field, or it might be some new force altogether. and then ghosts won't be mysteries. 
they will be like electricity and rainbows and nonstick frying pans. 
 
but sometimes a mystery isn't a mystery. and this is an example of a mystery which isn't a mystery. 
 
we have a pond at the school, with frogs in it, which are there so we can learn how to treat animals with 
kindness and respect, because some of the children at school are horrible to animals and think it's funny to 
crush worms or throw stones at cats. 
 
and some years there are lots of frogs in the pond, and some years there are very few. and if you drew a 
graph of how many frogs there were in the pond, it would look like this (but this graph is what's called 
hypothetical, which means that the numbers aren't the real numbers, it is just an illustration) 
 

 
and if you looked at the graph you might think that there was a really cold winter in 1987 and 1988 and 
1989 and 1997, or that there was a heron which came and ate lots of the frogs (sometimes there is a heron 
who comes and tries to eat the frogs, but there is chicken wire over the pond to stop it). 
 
but sometimes it has nothing to do with cold winters or cats or herons. sometimes it is just maths. 
 
here is a formula for a population of animals 

 

nnew = (cid:1)(nold)(1 - nold)  

and in this formula n stands for the population density. when n = 1 the population is the biggest it can 
get. and when n = 0 the population is extinct. nnew is the population in one year, and nold is the 
population in the year before. and (cid:13) is what is called a constant. 
 
when (cid:13), is less than 1, the population gets smaller and smaller and goes extinct. and when (cid:13), is between 
1 and 3, the population gets bigger and then it stays stable like this (and these graphs are hypothetical, 
too) 
 

 
 
and when (cid:13) is between 3 and 3.57 the population goes in cycles like this 
 

 

 

 
 
but when (cid:13), is greater than 3.57 the population becomes chaotic like in the first graph. 
 
this was discovered by robert may and george oster and jim yorke. and it means that sometimes 
things are so complicated that it is impossible to predict what they are going to do next, but they are only 
obeying really simple rules. 
 
and it means that sometimes a whole population of frogs, or worms, or people, can die for no reason 
whatsoever, just because that is the way the numbers work. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

157: 

 
it was six days before i could go back into father's room to look in the shirt box in the cupboard. 
 
on the first day, which was a wednesday, joseph fleming took his trousers off and went to the toilet all 
over the floor of the changing room and started to eat it, but mr. davis stopped him. 
 
joseph  eats  everything.  he  once  ate  one  of  the  little  blocks  of  blue  disinfectant  which  hang  inside  the 
toilets.  and  he  once  ate  a  £50  note  from  his  mother's  wallet.  and  he  eats  string  and  rubber  bands  and 
tissues and writing paper and paints and plastic forks. also he bangs his chin and screams a lot. 
 
tyrone said that there was a horse and a pig in the poo, so i said he was being stupid, but siobhan said he 
wasn't. they were small plastic animals from the library that the staff use to make people tell stories. and 
joseph had eaten them. 
 
so  i  said  i  wasn't  going  to  go  into  the  toilets  because  there  was  poo  on  the  floor  and  it  made  me  feel 
uncomfortable to think about it, even though mr. ennison had come in and cleaned it up. and i wet my 
trousers and i had to put on some spare ones from the spare clothes locker in mrs. gascoyne's room. so 
siobhan said i could use the staff room toilets for two days, but only two days, and then i would have to 
use the children's toilets again. and we made this a deal. 
 
on  the  second,  third  and  fourth  days,  which  were  thursday,  friday  and  saturday,  nothing  interesting 
happened. 
 
on the fifth day, which was a sunday, it rained very hard. i like it when it rains hard. it sounds like white 
noise everywhere, which is like silence but not empty. 
 
i went upstairs and sat in my room and watched the water falling in the street. it was falling so hard that it 
looked like white sparks (and this is a simile, too, not a metaphor). and there was no one around because 
everyone was staying indoors. and it made me think how all the water in the world was connected, and 
this water had evaporated from the oceans somewhere in the middle of the gulf of mexico or baffin bay, 
and now it was falling in front of the house and it would drain away into the gutters and flow to a sewage 
station where it would be cleaned and then it would go into a river and go back into the ocean again. 
 
and in the evening on monday father got a phone call from a lady whose cellar had flooded and he had 
to go out and fix it in an emergency. 
 
if there is only one emergency rhodri goes and fixes it because his wife and his children went to live in 
somerset,  which  means  he doesn't  have  anything  to  do  in  the  evenings  apart  from  playing  snooker  and 
drinking and watching the television, and he needs to do overtime to earn money to send to his wife to 
help  her  look  after  the  children.  and  father  has  me  to  look  after.  but  this  evening  there  were  two 
emergencies, so father told me to behave and to ring him on his mobile phone if there was a problem, and 
then he went out in the van. 
 
so i went into his bedroom and opened up the cupboard and lifted the toolbox off the top of the shirt box 
and opened the shirt box. 
 
i counted the letters. there were 43 of them. they were all addressed to me in the same handwriting. 
 
i took one out and opened it. 
 
inside was this letter 

3rd may 

 
451c chapter road  
wittesden  
london nw2 5ng  
0208 887 8907  
 
we have a  new fridge  and cooker  at  last! roger and i drove  to  the tip at  the  weekend  to  throw the old 
ones away.  it's where people  throw everything  away. there are huge bins for three  differant  colours of 
bottles  and  cardboard  and  engine  oil  and  garden  waste  and  household  waist  and  larger  items  (that's 
where we put the old fridge and cooker). 
 
then we went to a secondhand shop and bought a new cooker and a new fridge. now the house feels a 
little bit more like home. 
 
i  was  looking  through  some  old  photos  last  night,  which  made  me  sad.  then  i  found  a  photo  of  you 
playing  with  the  train  set  we  bought  for  you  a  couple  of  christmas's  ago.  and  that  made  me  happy 
because it was one of the really good times we had together. 
 
do you remember how you played with it all day and you refused to go to bed at night because you were 
still playing with it. and do you remember how we told you about train timetabels and you made a train 
timetabel  and  you  had  a  clock  and  you  made  the  trains  run  on  time.  and  there  was  a  little  woodden 
station, too, and we showed you how people who wanted to go on the train went to the station and bought 
a ticket and then got on the train? and then we got out a map and we showed you the little lines which 
were the trains lines connecting all the stations. and you played with it for weeks and weeks and weeks 
and we bought you more trains and you knew where they were all going. 
 
i liked remembering that a lot. 
 
i have to go now. it's half past three in the afternoon. i know you always like to know exactly what time it 
is. and i have to go to the co-op and buy some ham to make roger's tea with. i'll put this letter in the post 
box on the way to the shop. 
 

love, 
your mum 
xxxxxx 

then i opened another envelope. this was the letter that was inside 

 
flat 1, 312 lausanne rd  
london n8 5ng  
0208 756 4321  

dear christopher, 

 
i said that i wanted to explain to you why i went away when i had the time to do it properly. now i have 
lots  of  time.  so  i'm  sitting  on  the  sofa  here  with  this  letter  and  the  radio  on  and  i'm  going  to  try  and 
explain. 
 
i  was  not  a  very  good  mother,  christopher.  maybe  if  things  had  been  different,  maybe  if  you'd  been 
differant, i might have been better at it. but that's just the way things turned out. 
 
 

i'm  not  like  your  father.  your  father  is  a  much  more  pacient  person.  he  just  gets  on  with  things  and  if 
things upset him he doesn't let it show. but that's not the way i am and there's nothing i can do to change 
that. 
 
do you remember once when we were shopping in town together? and we went into bentalls and it was 
really crowded and we had to get a christmas present for grandma? and you were frightened because of 
all the people in the shop. it was the middle of christmas shopping when everyone was in town. and i was 
talking to mr. land who works on the kichen floor and went to school with me. and you crouched down 
on  the  floor  and  put  your  hands  over  your  ears  and  you  were  in  the  way  of  everyone.  so  i  got  cross, 
because i don't like shopping at christmas, either, and i told you to behave and i tried to pick you up and 
move  you.  but  you  shouted  and  you  knocked  those  mixers  off  the  shelf  and  there  was  a  big  crash.  and 
everyone turned round to see what was going on. and mr. land was realy nice about it but there were 
boxes and bits of broken bowl on the floor and everyone was staring and i saw that you had wet yourself 
and i was so cross and i wanted to take you out of the shop but you wouldn't let me touch you and you 
just  lay  on  the  floor  and  screamed  and  banged  your  hands  and  feet  on  the  floor  and  the  maniger  came 
and asked what the problem was and i was at the end of my tether and i had to pay for two broken mixers 
and we just had to wait until you stoped screaming. and then i had to walk you all the way home which 
took hours because i knew you wouldn't go on the bus again. 
 
and i remember that night i just cried and cried and cried and your father was really nice about it at first 
and he made you supper and he put you to bed and he said these things happen and it would be ok. but i 
said i couldn't take it anymore and eventually he got really cross and he told me i was being stupid and 
said i should pull myself together and i hit him, which was wrong, but i was so upset. 
 
we had a lot of argumants like that. because i often thought i couldn't take any more. and your father is 
really pacient but i'm not, i get cross, even though i don't mean too. and by the end we stopped talking to 
each other very much because we knew it would always end up in an argumant and it would go nowere. 
and i felt realy lonley. 
 
and that was when i started spending lots of time with roger. i mean obviously we had always spent lots 
of time with roger and eileen. but i started seeing roger on his own because i could talk to him. he was 
the only person i could really talk to. and when i was with him i didn't feel lonley anymore. 
 
and i know you might not understand any of this, but i wanted to try to explain, so that you knew. and 
even  if  you  don't  understand  now,  you  can  keep  this  letter  and  read  it  later  and  maybe  you  might 
understand then. 
 
and  roger  told  me  that  he  and  eileen  weren't  in  love  with  one  another  anymore,  and  that  they  hadn't 
been in love with one another for a long time. which meant that he was feeling lonely too. so we had a lot 
in common. and then we realized that we were in love with one another. and he suggested that i should 
leave your father and that we should move into a house together. but i said that i couldn't leave you, and 
he was sad about that but he understood that you were realy important to me. 
 
and then  you and me had that argumant do  you remember? it was about  your supper one  evening. i'd 
cooked  you  something  and  you  wouldn't  eat  it.  and  you  hadn't  eaten  for  days  and  days  and  you  were 
looking so thin. and you started to shout and i got cross and i threw the food across the room. which i 
know i shouldn't have done. and you grabbed the chopping board and you threw that and it hit my foot 
and broke my toes. then, of course, we had to go to the hospital and i had that plaster put on my foot. 
and  afterward,  at  home,  your  father  and  i  had  a  huge  argumant.  he  blamed  me  for  getting  cross  with 
you.  and  he  said  i  should  just  give  you  what  you  wanted,  even  if  it  was  just  a  plate  of  lettuce  or  a 
strawberry milk shake. and i said i was just trying to get you to eat something healthy. and he said you 
couldn't help it. and i said well i couldn't help it either and i just lost my rag. and he said that if he could 
keep his temper then i should bloody well keep my temper. and it went on and on like this. 
 

and i couldn't walk properly for a month, do you remember, and your father had to look after you. and i 
remember looking at the two of you and seeing you together and thinking how you were really differant 
with him. much calmer. and you didn't shout at one another. and it made me so sad because it was like 
you didn't really need me at all. and somehow that was even worse than you and me arguing all the time 
because it was like i was invisible. 
 
and i think that was when i realized you and your father were probably better off if i wasn't living in the 
house. then he would only have one person to look after instead of two. 
 
then roger said that he had asked the bank for a transfer. that means he asked them if he could have a 
job in london, and he was leaving. he asked me  if i wanted to come with him, i thought about it  for a 
long time, christopher. honestly, i did. and it broke my heart, but eventualy i decided it would be better 
for all of us if i went. so i said yes. 
 
i meant to say goodbye. i was going to  come back and pick up  some clothes when you  were back from 
school. and that was when i was going to explain what i was doing and say that i would come back and 
see you as often as i could and you could come down to london sometimes to stay with us. but when i 
rang your father he said i couldn't come back. he was really angry. he said i couldn't talk to you, i didn't 
know what to do. he said that i was being selfish and that i was never to set foot inside the house again. 
so i haven't. but i have written you these letters instead. 
 
i  wonder  if  you  can  understand  any  of  this.  i  know  it  will  be  very  difficult  for  you.  but  i  hope  you  can 
understand a little. 
 
christopher, i never meant to hurt you. i thought that what i was doing was the best for all of us. i hope it 
is. and i want you to know that this is not your fault. 
 
i  used  to  have  dreams  that  everything  would  get  better.  do  you  remember,  you  used  to  say  that  you 
wanted to be an astranaut? well, i used to have dreams where you were an astranaut and you were on 
the television and i thought that's my son. i wonder what it is that you want to be now. has it changed? 
are you still doing maths? i hope you are. 
 
please,  christopher,  write  to  me  sometime,  or  ring  me  on  the  telephone.  the  numbers  at  the  top  of  the 
letter. 
 

love and kisses,  
your mother  
x x x x x x 

then i opened a third envelope. this was the letter that was inside 

 

18th september 

dear christopher, 

 

 
flat 1  
312 lausanne rd  
london n8 5ng  
0208 756 4321  

well, i said i'd write to you every week, and i have. in fact, this is the second letter this week, so i'm doing 
even better than i said. 
 
i  have  got  a  job!  i'm  working  in  camden,  at  perkin  and  rashid,  which  is  a  chartered  survayors.  that 
means they go around looking at houses and work out how much they should cost and what work needs to 
be done on them and how much that work will cost. and also they work out how much new houses and 
offices and factories will cost to build. 
 
it's a nice office. the other secretary is angie. her desk is covered in little teddy bears and furry toys and 
pictures  of  her  children  (so  i've  put  a  picture  of  you  in  a  frame  on  my  desk).  she's  really  nice  and  we 
always go out for lunch together. 
 
i don't know how long i'll stay here, though i have to do a lot of adding up of numbers for when we send 
bills out to clients and i'm not very good at doing this (you'd be better at it than i am!). 
 
the company is run by two men called mr. perkin and mr. rashid. mr. rashid is from pakistan and very 
stern and always wants us to work faster. and mr. perkin is weird (angie calls him pervy perkin). when 
he comes and stands next to me to ask a question he always puts his hand on my sholder and squots down 
so his face is really near mine and i can smell his toothpaste which gives me the creeps. and the pay is 
not very good, either. so i shall be looking for something better as soon as i get the chance. 
 
i went up to alexandra palace the other day. it's a big park just round the corner from our flat, and the 
park  is  a  huge hill  with  a  big  conference  center  on  the  top  and  it  made  me  think  of  you  because  if  you 
came here we could go there and fly kites or watch the planes coming into heathrow airport and i know 
you'd like that. 
 
i have to go now, christopher. i'm writing this in my lunch hour (angie is off sick with the flu, so we can't 
have lunch together). please write to me sometime and tell me about how you are and what your doing at 
school. 
 
i hope you  got the present i sent you. have  you solved  it yet? roger and i saw it in a shop in  camden 
market and i know you've always liked puzles. roger tried to get the two pieces apart before we wrapped 
it up and he couldn't do it. he said that if you managed to do it you were a genius. 
 

loads and loads of love, 
your mother 
x x x x 

and this was the fourth letter 

 

23rd august 

dear christopher, 

 
i'm sorry i didn't write last week. i had to go to the dentist and have two of my molars out. you might not 
remember  when  we  had  to  take  you  to  the  dentist.  you  wouldn't  let  anyone  put  their  hand  inside  your 

 
flat 1  
312 lausanne rd  
london n8 5ng  
0208 756 4321  

mouth so we had to put you to sleep so that the dentist could take one of your teeth out. well, they didn't 
put  me  to  sleep,  they  just  gave  me  what  is  called  a  local  anathsetic  which  means  that  you  can't  feel 
anything in your mouth, which is just as well because they had to saw through the bone to get the tooth 
out. and it didn't hurt at all. in fact i was laughing because the dentist had to tug and pull and strain so 
much and it seemed really funny to me. but when i got home the pain started to come back and i had to 
lie on the sofa for two days and take lots of painkillers. . . 

then i stopped reading the letter because i felt sick. 
 
mother had not had a heart attack. mother had not died. mother had been alive all the time. and father 
had lied about this. 
 
i  tried  really  hard  to  think  if  there  was  any  other  explanation  but  i  couldn't  think  of  one.  and  then  i 
couldn't think of anything at all because my brain wasn't working properly. 
 
i  felt  giddy.  it  was like  the  room  was swinging  from  side  to side,  as  if  it  was  at  the  top of a  really  tall 
building and the building was swinging backward and forward in a strong wind (this is a simile, too). but 
i knew that the room couldn't be swinging backward and forward, so it must have been something which 
was happening inside my head. 
 
i rolled onto the bed and curled up in a ball. 
 
my stomach hurt. 
 
i don't know what happened then  because there is a gap in  my  memory, like  a bit of the tape had been 
erased. but i know that a lot of time must have passed because later on, when i opened my eyes again, i 
could see that it was dark outside the window. and i had been sick because there was sick all over the bed 
and on my hands and arms and face. 
 
but before this i heard father coming into the house and calling out  my name, which is another reason 
why i know a lot of time had passed. 
 
and it was strange because he was calling, "christopher. . . ? christopher. . . ?" and i could see my name 
written out as he was saying it. often i can see what someone is saying written out like it is being printed 
on  a  computer  screen,  especially  if  they  are  in  another  room.  but  this  was  not  on  a  computer  screen.  i 
could see it written really large, like it was on a big advert on the side of a bus. and it was in my mother's 
handwriting, like this 
 

 

 
and then i heard father come up the stairs and walk into the room. 
 
 
he  said,  "christopher,  what  the  hell  are  you  doing?"  and  i  could  tell  that  he  was  in  the  room,  but  his 
voice sounded tiny and far away, like people's voices sometimes do when i am groaning and i don't want 
them to be near me. 
 
and he said, "what the fuck are you. . . ? that's my cupboard, christopher. those are. . . oh shit. . . shit, 
shit, shit, shit, shit." 
 
then he said nothing for a while. 

 
then he put his hand on my shoulder and moved me onto my side and he said, "oh christ." but it didn't 
hurt when he touched me, like it normally does. i could see him touching me, like i was watching a film 
of  what  was  happening  in  the  room,  but  i  could  hardly  feel  his  hand  at  all.  it  was  just  like  the  wind 
blowing against me. 
 
and then he was silent again for a while. 
 
then he said, "i'm sorry, christopher. i'm so, so sorry." 
 
then he said, "you read the letters." 
 
then i  could hear  that  he was  crying because  his breath sounded  all  bubbly and wet,  like it  does when 
someone has a cold and they have lots of snot in their nose. 
 
then he said, "i did it for your good, christopher. honestly i did. i never meant to lie. i just thought. . . i 
just thought it was better if you didn't know. . . that. . . that. . . i didn't mean to . . . i was going to show 
them to you when you were older." 
 
then he was silent again. 
 
then he said, "it was an accident." 
 
then he was silent again. 
 
then he said, "i didn't know what to say. . . i was in such a mess . . . she left a note and. . . then she rang 
and. . . i said she was in hospital because. . . because i didn't know how to explain. it was so complicated. 
so difficult. and i. . . i said she was in hospital. and i know it wasn't true. but once i'd said  that. . . i 
couldn't. . . i couldn't change it. do you understand. . . christopher. . . ? christopher. . . ? it just. . . it got 
out of control and i wish. . ." 
 
then he was silent for a really long time. 
 
then he touched me on the shoulder again and said, "christopher, we have to get you cleaned up, ok?" 
 
he shook my shoulder a little bit but i didn't move. 
 
and he said, "christopher, i'm going to go to the bathroom and i'm going to run you a hot bath. then i'm 
going  to  come  back  and  take  you  to  the  bathroom,  ok?  then  i  can  put  the  sheets  into  the  washing 
machine." 
 
then i heard him get up and go to the bathroom and turn the taps on. i listened to the water running into 
the bath. he didn't come back for a while. then he came back and touched my shoulder again and said, 
"let's do this really gently, christopher. let's sit you up and get your clothes off and get you into the bath, 
ok? i'm going to have to touch you, but it's going to be all right." 
 
then he lifted me up and made me sit on the side of the bed. he took my jumper and my shirt off and put 
them on the bed. then he made me stand up and walk through to the bathroom. and i didn't scream. and 
i didn't fight. and i didn't hit him. 
 

 

 

163: 

when  i  was  little  and  i  first  went  to  school,  my  main  teacher  was  called  julie,  because  siobhan  hadn't 
started working at the school then. she only started working at the school when i was twelve. 
 
and one day julie sat down at a desk next to me  and put  a tube of smarties on the desk,  and she said, 
"christopher, what do you think is in here?" 
 
and i said, "smarties." 
 
then she took the top off the smarties tube and turned it upside down and a little red pencil came out and 
she laughed and i said, "it's not smarties, it's a pencil." 
 
then she put the little red pencil back inside the smarties tube and put the top back on. 
 
then she said, "if your mummy came in now and we asked her what was inside the smarties tube, what 
do you think she would say?" because i used to call mother mummy then, not mother. 
 
and i said, "a pencil." 
 
that was because when i was little i didn't understand about other people having minds. and julie said to 
mother and father that i would always find this very difficult. but i don't find this difficult now. because 
i decided that it was a kind of puzzle, and if something is a puzzle there is always a way of solving it. 
 
it's like computers. people think computers are different from people because they don't have minds, even 
though, in the turing test, computers can have conversations with people about the weather and wine and 
what italy is like, and they can even tell jokes. 
 
but the mind is just a complicated machine. 
 
and when we look  at  things we  think we're  just looking out of our  eyes like we're  looking out  of little 
windows and there's a person inside our head, but we're not. we're looking at a screen inside our heads, 
like a computer screen. 
 
and  you  can  tell  this  because  of  an  experiment  which  i  saw  on  tv  in  a  series  called  how  the  mind 
works.  and  in  this  experiment  you  put  your  head  in  a  clamp  and  you  look  at  a  page  of  writing  on  a 
screen. and it looks like a normal page of writing and nothing is changing. but after a while, as your eye 
moves round the page, you realize that something is very strange because when you try to read a bit of the 
page you've read before it's different. 
 
and  this  is  because  when  your  eye  flicks  from  one  point  to  another  you  don't  see  anything  at  all  and 
you're  blind.  and  the  flicks  are  called  saccades.  because  if  you  saw  everything  when  your  eye  flicked 
from one point to another you'd feel giddy. and in the experiment there is a sensor which tells when your 
eye is flicking from one place to another, and  when it's doing this it changes some of the words on the 
page in a place where you're not looking. 
 
but you don't notice that you're blind during saccades because your brain fills in the screen in your head 
to  make  it  seem  like  you're  looking  out  of  two  little  windows  in  your  head.  and  you  don't  notice  that 
words have changed on another part of the page because your mind fills in a picture of things you're not 
looking at at that moment. 
 
and  people  are  different  from  animals  because  they  can  have  pictures  on  the  screens  in  their  heads  of 
things  which  they  are  not  looking  at.  they  can  have  pictures  of  someone  in  another  room.  or  they  can 

have  a  picture  of  what  is  going  to  happen  tomorrow.  or  they  can  have  pictures  of  themselves  as  an 
astronaut.  or  they  can  have  pictures  of  really  big  numbers.  or  they  can  have  pictures  of  chains  of 
reasoning when they're trying to work something out. 
 
and that is why a dog can go to the vet and have a really big operation and have metal pins sticking out of 
its leg but if it sees a cat it forgets that it has pins sticking out of its leg and chases after the cat. but when 
a person has an operation it has a picture in its head of the hurt carrying on for months and months. and it 
has a picture of all the stitches in its leg and the broken bone and the pins and even if it sees a bus it has to 
catch  it doesn't  run  because  it  has  a  picture  in  its  head of  the  bones  crunching  together  and  the stitches 
breaking and even more pain. 
 
and that is why people think that computers don't have minds, and why people think that their brains are 
special, and different from computers. because people can see the screen inside their head and they think 
there  is  someone  in  their  head  sitting  there  looking  at  the  screen,  like  captain  jean-luc  picard  in  star 
trek:  the  next  generation  sitting  in  his  captain's  seat  looking  at  a  big  screen.  and  they  think  that  this 
person is their special human  mind, which is  called  a  homunculus, which  means  a  little  man. and they 
think that computers don't have this homunculus. 
 
but this homunculus is just another picture on the screen in their heads. and when the homunculus is on 
the screen in their heads (because the person is thinking about the homunculus) there is another bit of the 
brain watching the screen. and when the person thinks about this part of the brain (the bit that is watching 
the homunculus on the screen) they put this bit of the brain on the screen and there is another bit of the 
brain watching the screen. but the brain doesn't  see  this happen because it is  like the eye flicking from 
one  place  to  another  and  people  are  blind  inside  their  heads  when  they  do  the  changing  from  thinking 
about one thing to thinking about another. 
 
and this is why people's brains are like computers. and it's not because they are special but because they 
have  to  keep  turning  off  for  fractions  of  a  second  while  the  screen  changes.  and  because  there  is 
something they can't see people think it has to be special, because people always think there is something 
special about what they can't see, like the dark side of the moon, or the other side of a black hole, or in the 
dark when they wake up at night and they're scared. 
 
also  people  think  they're  not  computers  because  they  have  feelings  and  computers  don't  have  feelings. 
but feelings are just having a picture on the screen in your head of what is going to happen tomorrow or 
next year, or what might have happened instead of what did happen, and if it is a happy picture they smile 
and if it is a sad picture they cry. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

167: 

 
after father had given me a bath and cleaned the sick off me and dried me off with a towel, he took me to 
my bedroom and put some clean clothes on. 
 
then he said, "have you had anything to eat yet this evening?" 
 
but i didn't say anything. 
 
then he said, "can i get you anything to eat, christopher?" 
 
but i still didn't say anything. 
 
so he said, "ok. look. i'm going to go and put your clothes and the bedsheets into the washing machine 
and then i'll come back, ok?" 
 
i sat on the bed and looked at my knees. 
 
so father went out of the room and picked up my clothes from the bathroom floor and put them on the 
landing.  then  he  went  and  got  the  sheets  from  his  bed  and  brought  them  out  onto  the  landing  together 
with my shirt and my jumper. then he picked them all up and took them downstairs. then i heard him 
start the washing machine and i heard the boiler starting up and the water in the water pipes going into the 
washing machine. 
 
that was all i could hear for a long time. 
 
i doubled 2's in my head because it made me feel calmer. i got to 33554432, which is 225, which was not 
very much because i've got to 243 before, but my brain wasn't working very well. 
 
then father came back into the room again and said, "how are you feeling? can i get you anything?" 
 
i didn't say anything. i carried on looking at my knees. 
 
and father didn't say anything either. he just sat down on the bed next to me and put his elbows on his 
knees and looked down at the carpet between his legs where there was a little red piece of lego with eight 
nobbles on. 
 
then i heard toby waking up, because he is nocturnal, and i heard him rustling in his cage. 
 
and father was silent for a really long time. 
 
then he said, "look, maybe i shouldn't say this, but. . . i want you to know that you can trust me. and. . . 
ok, maybe i don't tell the truth all the time. god knows, i try, christopher, god knows i do, but. . . life 
is difficult, you know. it's bloody hard telling the truth all the time. sometimes it's impossible. and i want 
you to know that i'm trying, i really am. and perhaps this is not a very good time to say this, and i know 
you're not going to like it, but. . . you have to know that i am going to tell you the truth from now on. 
about everything. because. . . if you don't tell the truth now, then later on. . . later on it hurts even more. 
so. . ." 
 
father rubbed his face with his hands and pulled his chin down with his fingers and stared at the wall. i 
could see him out of the corner of my eye. 
 
and he said, "i killed wellington, christopher." 

 
i  wondered  if  this  was  a  joke,  because  i  don't  understand  jokes,  and  when  people  tell  jokes  they  don't 
mean what they say. 
 
but  then  father  said,  "please.  christopher.  just.  .  .  let  me  explain."  then  he  sucked  in  some  air  and  he 
said, "when your mum left. . . eileen. . . mrs. shears. . . she was very good to us. very good to me. she 
helped  me through a very difficult time. and i'm not sure i would have  made it without her. well, you 
know how she was round here most days. helping out with the cooking and the cleaning. popping over to 
see if we were ok, if we needed anything. . . i thought. . . well. . . shit, christopher, i'm trying to keep 
this simple. . . i thought she might carry on coming over. i thought. . . and maybe i was being stupid. . . i 
thought she might. . . eventually . . . want to move in here. or that we might move into her house. we. . . 
we got on really, really well. i thought we were friends. and i guess i thought wrong. i guess. . . in the 
end. . . it comes down to. . . shit. . . we argued, christopher, and. . . she said some things i'm not going to 
say to you because they're not nice, but they hurt, but. . . i think she cared more for that bloody dog than 
for me, for us. and maybe that's not so stupid, looking back. maybe we are a bloody handful. and maybe 
it  is  easier  living  on  your  own  looking  after  some  stupid  mutt  than  sharing  your  life  with  other  actual 
human beings. i mean, shit, buddy, we're not exactly low-maintenance, are we. . . ? anyway, we had this 
row. well, quite a few rows to be honest. but after this particularly nasty little blowout, she chucked me 
out of the house. and you know what that bloody dog was like after the operation. bloody schizophrenic. 
nice as pie one moment, roll over, tickle its stomach. sink its teeth into your leg the next. anyway, we're 
yelling  at  each  other  and  it's  in  the  garden  relieving  itself.  so  when  she  slams  the  door  behind  me  the 
bugger's waiting for me. and. . . i know, i know. maybe if i'd just given it a kick it would probably have 
backed off. but, shit, christopher, when that red mist comes down. . . christ, you know how it is. i mean, 
we're not that different, me and you. and all i could think was that she cared more about this bloody dog 
than she did about you or me. and it was like everything i'd been bottling up for two years just. . ." 
 
then father was silent for a bit. 
 
then he said, "i'm sorry, christopher. i promise you, i never meant for it to turn out like this." 
 
and then i knew that it wasn't a joke and i was really frightened. 
 
father said, "we all make mistakes, christopher. you, me, your mum, everyone. and sometimes they're 
really big mistakes. we're only human." 
 
then he held up his right hand and spread his fingers out in a fan. 
 
but i screamed and pushed him backward so that he fell off the bed and onto the floor. 
 
he  sat  up  and  said,  "ok.  look.  christopher.  i'm  sorry.  let's  leave  it  for  tonight,  ok?  i'm  going  to  go 
downstairs and you get some sleep and we'll talk in the morning." then he said, "it's going to be all right. 
honestly. trust me." 
 
then he stood up and took a deep breath and went out of the room. 
 
i sat on the bed for a long time looking at the floor. then i heard toby scratching in his cage. i looked up 
and saw him staring through the bars at me. 
 
i had to get out of the house. father had murdered wellington. that meant he could murder me, because i 
couldn't trust him, even though he had said "trust me," because he had told a lie about a big thing. 
 
 
but i couldn't get out of the house straightaway because he would see me, so i would have to wait until he 
was asleep. 

 
the time was 11:16 p.m. 
 
i tried doubling 2's again, but i couldn't get past 215, which was 32768. so i groaned to make the time pass 
quicker and not think. 
 
then  it  was  1:20  a.m.  but  i  hadn't  heard  father  come  upstairs  to  bed.  i  wondered  if  he  was  asleep 
downstairs  or  whether  he  was  waiting  to  come  in  and  kill  me.  so  i  got  out  my  swiss  army  knife  and 
opened the saw blade so that i could defend myself. then i went out of my bedroom really quietly and 
listened. i couldn't hear anything, so i started going downstairs really quietly and really slowly. and when 
i got downstairs i could see father's foot through the door of the living room. i waited for 4 minutes to 
see if it moved, but it didn't move. so i carried on walking till i got to the hallway. then i looked round 
the door of the living room. 
 
father was lying on the sofa with his eyes closed. 
 
i looked at him for a long time. 
 
then he snored and i jumped and i could hear the blood in my ears and my heart going really fast and a 
pain like someone had blown up a really big balloon inside my chest. 
 
i wondered if i was going to have a heart attack. 
 
father's eyes were still  closed. i wondered if he was pretending to be asleep. so i gripped the penknife 
really hard and i knocked on the doorframe. 
 
father moved his head from one side to the other and his foot twitched and he said "gnnnn," but his eyes 
stayed closed. and then he snored again. 
 
he was asleep. 
 
that meant i could get out of the house if i was really quiet so i didn't wake him up. 
 
i took both my coats and my scarf from the hooks next to the front door and i put them all on because it 
would be cold outside at night. then i went upstairs again really quietly, but it was difficult because my 
legs were shaking. i went into my room and i picked up toby's cage. he was making scratching noises, 
so  i  took  off  one  of  the  coats  and  put  it  over  the  cage  to  make  the  noise  quieter.  then  i  carried  him 
downstairs again. 
 
father was still asleep. 
 
i  went  into  the  kitchen  and  i  picked  up  my  special  food  box.  i  unlocked  the  back  door  and  stepped 
outside. then i held the handle of the door down as i shut it again so that the click wasn't too loud. then i 
walked down the bottom of the garden. 
 
at  the  bottom  of  the  garden  is  a  shed.  it  has  the  lawn  mower  and  the  hedge  cutter  in  it,  and  lots  of 
gardening equipment that mother used to use, like pots and bags of compost and bamboo canes and string 
and spades. it would be a bit warmer in the shed but i knew that father might look for me in the shed, so i 
went round the back of the shed and i squeezed into the gap between the wall of the shed and the fence, 
behind the big black plastic tub for collecting rainwater. then i sat down and i felt a bit safer. 
 
i decided to leave my other coat over toby's cage because i didn't want him to get cold and die. 
 

i opened up my special food box. inside was the milkybar and two licorice laces and three clementines 
and  a  pink  wafer  biscuit  and  my  red  food  coloring.  i  didn't  feel  hungry  but  i  knew  that  i  should  eat 
something  because  if  you  don't  eat  something  you  can  get  cold,  so  i  ate  two  clementines  and  the 
milkybar. 
 
then i wondered what i would do next. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

173: 

 
between the roof of the shed and the big plant that hangs over the fence from the house next door i could 
see the constellation orion. 
 
people say that orion is called orion because orion was a hunter and the constellation looks like a hunter 
with a club and a bow and arrow, like this 
 

 
 
but this is really silly because it is just stars, and you could join up the dots in any way you wanted, and 
you could make it look like a lady with an umbrella who is waving, or the coffeemaker which mrs. shears 
has, which is from italy, with a handle and steam coming out, or like a dinosaur 
 

 

 

 
 
and there aren't any lines in space, so you could join bits of orion to bits of lepus or taurus or gemini 
and say that they were a constellation called the bunch of grapes or jesus or the bicycle (except that 
they didn't have bicycles in roman and greek times, which was when they called orion orion). 
 
and anyway, orion is not a hunter or a coffeemaker or a dinosaur. it is just betelgeuse and bellatrix and 
alnilam and rigel and 17 other stars i don't know the names of. and they are nuclear explosions billions 
of miles away. 
 
and that is the truth. 
 

 

 

179: 

 
i  stayed  awake  until  5:47.  that  was  the  last  time  i  looked  at  my  watch  before  i  fell  asleep.  it  has  a 
luminous  face  and  lights  up  if  you  press  a  button,  so  i  could  read  it  in  the  dark.  i  was  cold  and  i  was 
frightened father might come out and find me. but i felt safer in the garden because i was hidden. 
 
i looked at the sky a lot. i like looking up at the sky in the garden at night. in summer i sometimes come 
outside at night with my torch and my planisphere, which is two circles of plastic with a pin through the 
middle. and on the bottom is a map of the sky and on top is an aperture which is an opening shaped in a 
parabola and you turn it round to see a map of the sky that you can see on that day of the year from the 
latitude 51.5° north, which is the latitude that swindon is on, because the largest bit of the sky is always 
on the other side of the earth. 
 
and when you look at the sky you know you are looking at stars which are hundreds and thousands of 
light-years away from you. and some of the stars don't even exist anymore because their light has taken 
so long to get to us that they are already dead, or they have exploded and collapsed into red dwarfs. and 
that makes you seem very small, and if you have difficult things in your life it is nice to think that they are 
what  is  called  negligible,  which  means  that  they  are  so  small  you  don't  have  to  take  them  into  account 
when you are calculating something. 
 
i  didn't  sleep  very  well  because  of  the  cold  and  because  the  ground  was  very  bumpy  and  pointy 
underneath me and because toby was scratching in his cage a lot. but when i woke up properly it was 
dawn and the sky was all orange and blue and purple and i could hear birds singing, which is called the 
dawn  chorus.  and  i  stayed  where  i  was  for  another  2  hours  and  32  minutes,  and  then  i  heard  father 
come into the garden and call out, "christopher. . . ? christopher. . . ?" 
 
so i turned round and i found an old plastic sack covered in mud that used to have fertilizer in it and i 
squeezed myself and toby's cage and my special food box into the corner between the wall of the shed 
and the fence and the rainwater tub and i covered myself with the fertilizer sack. and then i heard father 
coming down the garden and i took my swiss army knife out of my pocket and got out the saw blade and 
held it in case he found us. and i heard him open the door of the shed and look inside. and then i heard 
him say "shit." and then i heard his footsteps in the bushes round the side of the shed and my heart was 
beating really fast and i could feel the feeling like a balloon inside my chest again and i think he might 
have  looked  round  the  back  of  the  shed,  but  i  couldn't  see  because  i  was  hiding,  but  he  didn't  see  me 
because i heard him walking back up the garden again. 
 
then i stayed still and i looked at my watch and i stayed still for 27 minutes. and then i heard father start 
the engine of his van. i knew it was his van because i heard it very often and it was nearby and i knew it 
wasn't any of the neighbors' cars because the people who take drugs have a volkswagen camper van and 
mr. thompson, who lives at number 40, has a vauxhall cavalier and the people who live at number 34 
have a peugeot and they all sound different. 
 
and when i heard him drive away from the house i knew it would be safe to come out. 
 
and then i had to decide what to do because i couldn't live in the house with father anymore because it 
was dangerous. 
 
so i made a decision. 
 
i decided that i would go and knock on mrs. shears's door and i would go and live with her, because i 
knew her and she wasn't a stranger and i had stayed in her house before, when there was a power cut on 
our side of the street. and this time she wouldn't tell me to go away because i would be able to tell her 

who  had  killed  wellington  and  that  way  she  would  know  that  i  was  a  friend.  and  also  she  would 
understand why i couldn't live with father anymore. 
 
i took the licorice laces and the pink wafer biscuit and the last clementine out of my special food box and 
put them in my pocket and hid the special food box under the fertilizer bag. then i picked up toby's cage 
and my extra coat and i climbed out from behind the shed. i walked up the garden and down the side of 
the house. i undid the bolt in the garden door and walked out in front of the house. 
 
there was no one in the street so i crossed and walked up the drive to mrs. shears's house and knocked 
on the door and waited and worked out what i was going to say when she opened the door. 
 
but she didn't come to the door. so i knocked again. then i turned round and saw some people walking 
down the street and i was frightened again because it was two of the people who take drugs in the house 
next door. so i grabbed toby's cage and went round the side of mrs. shears's house and sat down behind 
the dustbin so they couldn't see me. 
 
and then i had to work out what to do. 
 
and i did this by thinking of all the things i could do and deciding whether they were the right decision or 
not. 
 
i decided that i couldn't go home again. 
 
and i decided that i couldn't go and live with siobhan because she couldn't look after  me when school 
was closed because she was a teacher and not a friend or a member of my family. 
 
and  i  decided  that  i  couldn't  go  and  live  with  uncle  terry  because  he  lived  in  sunderland  and  i  didn't 
know how to get to sunderland and i didn't like uncle terry because he smoked cigarettes and stroked 
my hair. 
 
and i decided i couldn't go and live with mrs. alexander because she wasn't a friend or a member of my 
family even if she had a dog, because i couldn't stay overnight in her house or use her toilet because she 
had used it and she was a stranger. 
 
and then i thought that i could go and live with mother because she was my family and i knew where she 
lived  because  i  could  remember  the  address  from  the  letters,  which  was  451c  chapter  road,  london 
nw2 5ng. except that she lived in london and i'd never been to london before. i'd only been to dover 
to go to france, and to sunderland to visit uncle terry and to manchester to visit aunt ruth, who had 
cancer, except she didn't have cancer when i was there. and i had never been anywhere apart from the 
shop at the end of the road on my own. and the thought of going somewhere on my own was frightening. 
 
but then i thought about going home again, or staying where i was, or hiding in the garden every night 
and father finding me, and that made me feel even more frightened. and when i thought about that i felt 
like i was going to be sick again like i did the night before. 
 
and then i realized that there was nothing i could do which felt safe. and i  made a picture of it in  my 
head like this 
 

 
 
and  then  i  imagined  crossing  out  all  the  possibilities  which  were  impossible,  which  is  like  in  a  maths 
exam when you look at all the questions and you decide which ones you are going to do and which ones 
you are not going to do and you cross out all the ones which you are not going to do because then your 
decision is final and you can't change your mind. and it was like this 
 

 

 

 
 
which  meant  that  i  had  to  go  to  london  to  live  with  mother.  and  i  could  do  it  by  going  on  a  train 
because i knew all about trains from the train set, how you looked at the timetable and went to the station 
and bought a ticket and looked at the departure board to see if your train was on time and then you went 
to  the  right  platform  and  got  on  board.  and  i would  go  from  swindon  station,  where  sherlock  holmes 
and doctor watson stop for lunch when they are on their way to ross from paddington in the boscombe 
valley mystery. 
 
and  then  i  looked  at  the  wall  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  little  passage  down  the  side  of  mrs.  shears's 
house where i was sitting and there was the circular lid of a very old metal pan leaning against the wall. 

and  it  was  covered  in  rust.  and  it  looked  like  the  surface  of  a  planet  because  the  rust  was  shaped  like 
countries and continents and islands. 
 
and then i thought how i could never be an astronaut because being an astronaut meant being hundreds 
of thousands of miles away from home, and my home was in london now and that was about 100 miles 
away, which was more than 1,000 times nearer than my home would be if i was in space, and thinking 
about this made me hurt. like when i fell over in the grass at the edge of a playground once and i cut my 
knee on a piece of broken bottle that someone had thrown over the wall and i sliced a flap of skin off and 
mr. davis had to clean the flesh under the flap with disinfectant to get the germs and the dirt out and it 
hurt so much i cried. but this hurt was inside my head. and it made me sad to think that i could never 
become an astronaut. 
 
and  then  i  thought  that  i  had  to  be  like  sherlock  holmes  and  i  had  to  detach  my  mind  at  will  to  a 
remarkable degree so that i did not notice how much it was hurting inside my head. 
 
and then i thought i would need  money if i was going to go to london. and i would need food to eat 
because it was a long journey and i wouldn't know where to get food from. and then i thought i would 
need someone to look after toby when i went to london because i couldn't take him with me. 
 
and  then  i  formulated  a  plan.  and  that  made  me  feel  better  because  there  was  something  in my  head 
that had an order and a pattern and i just had to follow the instructions one after the other. 
 
i stood up and i made sure there was no one in the street. then i went to mrs. alexander's house, which is 
next door to mrs. shears's house, and i knocked on the door. 
 
then mrs. alexander opened the door, and she said, "christopher, what on earth has happened to you?" 
 
and i said, "can you look after toby for me?" 
 
and she said, "who's toby?" 
 
and i said, "toby's my pet rat." 
 
then mrs. alexander said, "oh. . . oh yes i remember now. you told me." 
 
then  i  held  toby's  cage  up  and  said,  "this  is  him."  mrs.  alexander  took  a  step  backward  into  her 
hallway. and i said, "he eats special pellets and you can buy them from a pet shop. but he can also eat 
biscuits  and  carrots  and  bread  and  chicken  bones.  but  you  mustn't  give  him  chocolate  because  it's  got 
caffeine and theobromine in it, which are methylxanthines, and it's poisonous for rats in large quantities. 
and he needs new water in his bottle every day, too. and he won't mind being in someone else's house 
because he's an animal. and he likes to come out of his cage, but it doesn't matter if you don't take him 
out." 
 
then mrs. alexander said, "why do you need someone to look after toby, christopher?" 
 
and i said, "i'm going to london." 
 
and she said, "how long are you going for?" 
 
and i said, "until i go to university." 
 
and she said, "can't you take toby with you?" 
 

and  i  said,  "london's  a  long  way  away  and  i  don't  want  to  take  him  on  the  train  because  i  might  lose 
him." 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "right." and then she said, "are you and your father moving house?" 
 
and i said, "no." 
 
and she said, "so, why are you going to london?" 
 
and i said, "i'm going to live with mother." 
 
and she said, "i thought you told me your mother was dead." 
 
and i said, "i thought she was dead, but she was still alive. and father lied to me. and also he said he 
killed wellington." 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "oh, my goodness." 
 
and  i  said,  "i'm  going  to  live  with  my  mother  because  father  killed  wellington  and  he  lied  and  i'm 
frightened of being in the house with him." 
 
and mrs. alexander said, "is your mother here?" 
 
and i said, "no. mother is in london." 
 
and she said, "so you're going to london on your own?" 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and she said, "look, christopher, why don't you come inside and sit down and we can talk about this and 
work out what is the best thing to do." 
 
and i said, "no. i can't come inside. will you look after toby for me?" 
 
and she said, "i really don't think that would be a good idea, christopher." 
 
and i didn't say anything. 
 
and she said, "where's your father at the moment, christopher?" 
 
and i said, "i don't know." 
 
and she said, "well, perhaps we should try and give him a ring and see if we can get in touch with him. 
i'm sure he's worried about you. and i'm sure that there's been some dreadful misunderstanding." 
 
so i turned round and i ran across the road back to our house. and i didn't look before i crossed the road 
and a yellow mini had to stop and the tires squealed on the road. and i ran down the side of the house 
and back through the garden gate and i bolted it behind me. 
 
i tried to open the kitchen door but it was locked. so i picked up a brick that was lying on the ground and 
i  smashed  it  through  the  window  and  the  glass  shattered  everywhere.  then  i  put  my  arm  through  the 
broken glass and i opened the door from the inside. 
 

i  went  into  the  house  and  i  put  toby  down  on  the  kitchen  table.  then  i  ran  upstairs  and  i  grabbed  my 
schoolbag and i put some food for toby in it and some of my maths books and some clean pants and a 
vest and a clean shirt. then i came downstairs and i opened the fridge and i put a carton of orange juice 
into my bag, and a bottle of milk that hadn't been opened. and i took two more clementines and two tins 
of  baked  beans  and  a  packet  of  custard  creams  from  the  cupboard  and  i  put  them  in  my  bag  as  well, 
because i could open them with the can opener or my swiss army knife. 
 
then  i  looked  on  the  surface  next  to  the  sink  and  i  saw  father's  mobile  phone  and  his  wallet  and  his 
address book and i felt my skin. . . cold under my clothes like doctor watson in the sign of four when 
he sees the tiny footsteps of tonga, the andaman islander, on the roof of bartholomew sholto's house in 
norwood, because i thought father had come back and he was in the house, and the pain in my head got 
much worse. but then i rewound the pictures in my memory and i saw that his van wasn't parked outside 
the  house,  so  he  must  have  left  his  mobile  phone  and  his  wallet  and  his  address  book  when  he  left  the 
house. and i picked up his wallet and i took his bank card out because that was how i could get money 
because  the  card  has  a  pin which is  the  secret  code  which  you  put  into  the  machine  at  the  bank  to get 
money out and father hadn't written it down in a safe place, which is what you're meant to do, but he had 
told me because he said i'd never forget it. and it was 3558. and i put the card into my pocket. 
 
then i took toby out of his cage and put him into the pocket of one of my coats because the cage was 
very heavy to carry all the way to london. and then i went out of the kitchen door into the garden again. 
 
i  went  out  through  the  garden  gate  and  made  sure  there  wasn't  anyone  watching,  and  then  i  started 
walking  toward  the  school  because  that  was  a  direction  i  knew,  and  when  i  got  to  school  i  could  ask 
siobhan where the train station was. 
 
normally  i  would  have  got  more  and  more  frightened  if  i  was  walking  to  school,  because  i  had  never 
done it before. but i was frightened in two different ways. and one way was being frightened of being far 
away from a place i was used to, and the other was being frightened of being near where father lived, and 
they were in inverse proportion to one another, so that the total fear remained a constant as i got further 
away from home and further away from father like this 

feartotal = fearnew place x fearnear father = constant  

it  takes  19  minutes  for  the  bus  to  get  to  school  from  our  house,  but  it  took  me  47  minutes  to  walk  the 
same distance, so i was very tired when i got there and i hoped that i could stay at school for a little while 
and have some biscuits and some orange juice before i went to the train station. but i couldn't, because 
when i got to the school i saw that father's van was parked outside in the car park. and i knew it was his 
van  because  it  said  ed  boone  heating  maintenance  &  boiler  repair  on  the  side  with  a  crossed 
spanners sign like this 
 

 

 

and when i saw the van i was sick again. but i knew i was going to be sick this time so i didn't sick all 
over myself and i was just sick onto the wall and the pavement, and there wasn't very much sick because i 
hadn't eaten much. and when i had been sick i wanted to curl up on the ground and do groaning. but i 
knew that if i curled up on the ground and did groaning, then father would come out of the school and he 
would see me and he would catch me and take me home. so i took lots of deep breaths like siobhan says 

i have to do if someone hits me at school, and i counted 50 breaths and i concentrated very hard on the 
numbers and did their cubes as i said them. and that made the hurt less painful. 
 
and then i cleaned the sick away from my mouth and i made a decision that i would have to find out how 
to get to the train station and i would do this by asking someone, and it would be a lady because when 
they talked to us about stranger danger at school they say that if a man comes up to you and talks to you 
and you feel frightened you should call out and find a lady to run to because ladies are safer. 
 
so i got out my swiss army knife and i flicked out the saw blade and i held it tightly in the pocket that 
toby wasn't in so that i could stab someone if they grabbed hold of me, and then i saw a lady on the other 
side of the street with a baby in a pushchair and a little boy with a toy elephant, so i decided to ask her. 
and this time i looked left and right and left again so that i wouldn't be run over by a car, and i crossed 
the road. 
 
and i said to the lady, "where can i buy a map?" 
 
and she said, "pardon?" 
 
and i said, "where can i buy a map?" and i could feel the hand that was holding the knife shaking even 
though i wasn't shaking it. 
 
and she said, "patrick, put that down, it's dirty. a map of where?" 
 
and i said, "a map of here." 
 
and she said, "i don't know." and then she said, "where do you want to get to?" 
 
and i said, "i'm going to the train station." 
 
and she laughed and she said, "you don't need a map to get to the train station." 
 
and i said, "i do, because i don't know where the train station is." 
 
and she said, "you can see it from here." 
 
and i said, "no i can't. and also i need to know where there is a cash machine." 
 
and she pointed and said, "there. that building. says signal point on the top. there's a british rail sign 
on the other end. the station's at the bottom of that. patrick, if i've told you once, i've told you a thousand 
times. don't pick things off the pavement and stick them in your mouth." 
 
and i looked and i could see a building with writing at the top, but it was a long way away so it was hard 
to read, and i said, "do you mean the stripy building with the horizontal windows?" 
 
and she said, "that's the one." 
 
and i said, "how do i get to that building?" 
 
and she said, "gordon bennett." and then she said, "follow that bus," and she pointed to a bus that was 
going past. 
 
so i started to run. but buses go really fast and i had to make sure that toby didn't fall out of my pocket. 
but i  managed to keep running after the bus for a long way and i crossed 6 side  roads before it  turned 
down another street and i couldn't see it anymore. 

sign the lady had pointed at, so i kept on walking toward it. 

 
and then i stopped running because i was breathing really hard and my legs hurt. and i was in a street 
with lots of shops. and i remembered being in this street when i went shopping with mother. and there 
were lots of people in the street doing their shopping, but i didn't want them to touch me, so i walked at 
the edge of the road. and i didn't like all the people being near me and all the noise because it was too 
much information in my head and it made it hard to think, like there was shouting in my head. so i put 
my hands over my ears and i groaned very quietly. 
 
and then i could still see the 
 
sign anymore. and i had forgotten to remember where it was, and 
and then i noticed i couldn't see the 
this was frightening because i was lost and because i do not forget things. and normally i would make a 
map in my head and i would follow the map and i would be a little cross on the map that showed where i 
was, but there was too much interference in my head and this had made me confused. so i stood under the 
green  and  white  canvas  roof  outside  a  greengrocer's  shop  where  there  were  carrots  and  onions  and 
parsnips and broccoli in boxes that had a plastic furry green carpet in them, and i made a plan. 
 
i knew that the train station was somewhere near. and if something is nearby you can find it by moving 
in a spiral, walking clockwise and taking every right turn until you come back to a road you've already 
walked  on,  then  taking  the  next  left,  then  taking  every  right  turn  and  so  on,  like  this  (but  this  is  a 
hypothetical diagram, too, and not a map of swindon) 
 

 

 
and  that  was  how  i  found  the  train  station,  and  i  concentrated  really  hard  on  following  the  rules  and 
making a map of the center of the town in my head as i walked, and that way it was easier to ignore all 
the people and all the noise around me.  
 
and then i went into the train station. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

181: 

 
i see everything. 
 
that  is  why  i  don't  like  new  places.  if  i  am  in  a  place  i  know,  like  home,  or  school, or  the  bus,  or the 
shop, or the street, i have seen  almost  everything in  it beforehand and all i have to do is to look at the 
things that have changed or moved. for example, one week the shakespeare's globe poster had fallen 
down in the classroom at school and you could tell because it had been put back slightly to the right and 
there were three little circles of blu-tack stain on the wall down the left-hand side of the poster. and the 
next day someone had graffitied crow aptok to lamppost 437 in our street, which is the one outside 
number 35. 
 
but most people are lazy. they never look at everything. they do what is called glancing, which is the 
same word for bumping off something and carrying on in almost the same direction, e.g., when a snooker 
ball glances off another snooker ball. and the information in their head is really simple. for example, if 
they are in the countryside, it might be 

1.  i am standing in a field that is full of grass.  
2.  there are some cows in the fields.  
3.  it is sunny with a few clouds.  
4.  there are some flowers in the grass.  
5.  there is a village in the distance.  
6.  there is a fence at the edge of the field and it has a gate in it.  

and then they would stop noticing anything because they would be thinking something else like, "oh, it 
is very beautiful here," or "i'm worried that i might have left the gas cooker on," or "i wonder if julie has 
given birth yet."12 
 
but if i am standing in a field in the countryside i notice everything. for example, i remember standing in 
a  field  on  wednesday,  15  june  1994,  because  father  and  mother  and  i  were  driving  to  dover  to  get  a 
ferry to france and we did what father called taking the scenic route, which means going by little roads 
and stopping for lunch in a pub garden, and i had to stop to go for a wee, and i went into a field with cows 
in it and after i'd had a wee i stopped and looked at the field and i noticed these things 

1.  there  are  19  cows  in  the  field,  15  of  which  are  black  and  white  and  4  of  which  are  brown  and 

white.  

2.  there is a village in the distance which has 31 visible houses and a church with a square tower and 

not a spire.  

3.  there are ridges in the field, which means that in medieval times it was what is called a ridge and 

furrow field and people who lived in the village would have a ridge each to do farming on.  

4.  there is an old plastic bag from asda in the hedge, and a squashed coca-cola can with a snail on 

it, and a long piece of orange string.  

5.  the northeast  corner of  the field is  highest  and  the southwest  corner is  lowest (i had a  compass 
because we were going on holiday and i wanted to know where swindon was when we were in 
france) and the field is folded downward slightly along the line between these two corners so that 
the  northwest  and  southeast  corners  are  slightly  lower  than  they  would  be  if  the  field  was  an 
inclined plane.  

6.  i can see three different types of grass and two colors of flowers in the grass.  
7.  the cows are mostly facing uphill.  

and there were 31 more things in this list of things i noticed but siobhan said i didn't need to write them 
all down. and it means that it is very tiring if i am in a new place because i see all these things, and if 

someone asked me afterward what the cows looked like, i could ask which one, and i could do a drawing 
of them at home and say that a particular cow had patterns on it like this 
 

 

 

and i realize that i told a lie in chapter 13 because i said "i cannot tell jokes," because i do know 3 jokes 
that i can tell and i understand and one of them is about a cow, and siobhan said i didn't have to go back 
and change what i wrote in chapter 13 because it doesn't matter because it is not a lie, just a clarification. 
 
and this is the joke. 
 
there  are  three  men  on  a  train.  one  of  them  is  an  economist  and  one  of  them  is  a  logician  and  one  of 
them is a mathematician. and they have just crossed the border into scotland (i don't know why they are 
going to scotland) and they see  a brown cow standing in  a  field from  the window of the  train (and the 
cow is standing parallel to the train). 
 
and the economist says, "look, the cows in scotland are brown." 
 
and the logician says, "no. there are cows in scotland of which one at least is brown." 
 
and the mathematician says, "no. there is at least one cow in scotland, of which one side appears to be 
brown." 
 
and it is funny because economists are not real scientists, and because logicians think more clearly, but 
mathematicians are best. 
 
and when i am in a new place, because i see everything, it is like when a computer is doing too many 
things at the same time and the central processor unit is blocked up and there isn't any space left to think 
about  other  things.  and  when  i  am  in  a  new  place  and  there  are  lots  of  people  there  it  is  even  harder 
because people are not like cows and flowers and grass and they can talk to you and do things that you 
don't expect, so you have to notice everything that is in the place, and also you have to notice things that 
might happen as well. and sometimes when i am in a new place and there are lots of people there it is 
like a computer crashing and i have to close my eyes and put my hands over my ears and groan, which is 
like  pressing  ctrl  +  alt  +  del  and  shutting  down  programs  and  turning  the  computer  off  and 
rebooting so that i can remember what i am doing and where i am meant to be going. 
 
and that is why i am good at chess and maths and logic, because most people are almost blind and they 
don't see  most things and there is lots of spare capacity in their heads and it is filled with things which 
aren't connected and are silly, like, "i'm worried that i might have left the gas cooker on." 
 

 

 

 

191: 

 
my train set had a little building that was two rooms with a corridor between them, and one was the ticket 
office where you bought the tickets, and one was a waiting room where you waited for the train. but the 
train  station  in  swindon  wasn't  like  that.  it  was  a  tunnel  and  some  stairs,  and  a  shop  and  café  and  a 
waiting room like this 
 

 

 
but this is not a very accurate map of the station because i was scared so i was not noticing things very 
well, and this is just what i remember so it is an approximation. 
 
and it was like standing on a cliff in a really strong wind because it made me feel giddy and sick because 
there were lots of people walking into and out of the tunnel and it was really echoey and there was only 
one way to go and that was down the tunnel, and it smelled of toilets and cigarettes. so i stood against the 
wall  and  held  on  to  the  edge  of  a  sign  that  said  customers  seeking  access  to  car  park  please  use 
assistance  phone  opposite,  right  of  the  ticket  office  to  make  sure  that  i  didn't  fall  over  and  go  into  a 
crouch on the ground. and i wanted to go home but i was frightened of going home and i tried to make a 
plan of what i should do in  my head but there  were too  many things to look at and too  many things to 
hear. 
 
so i put my hands over my ears to block out the noise and think. and i thought that i had to stay in the 
station to get on a train and i had to sit down somewhere and there was nowhere to sit down near the door 
of the station so i had to walk down the tunnel. so i said to myself, in my head, not out loud, "i will walk 
down  the  tunnel  and  there  might  be  somewhere  i  can  sit  down  and  then  i  can  shut  my  eyes  and  i  can 
think,"  and  i  walk  down  the  tunnel  trying  to  concentrate  on  the  sign  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel  that  said 
warning cctv in operation. and it was like stepping off the cliff on a tightrope. 
 
and eventually i got to the end of the tunnel and there were some stairs and i went up the stairs and there 
were still lots of people and i groaned and there was a shop at the top of the stairs and a room with chairs 
in  it  but  there  were  too  many  people  in  the  room  with  chairs  in  it,  so  i  walked  past  it.  and  there  were 

signs saying great western and cold beers and lagers and caution wet floor and your 50p 
will keep a premature baby alive for 1.8 seconds and transforming travel and refreshingly different 
and it's delicious it's creamy and it's only £1.30 hot choc deluxe and 0870 777 
7676  and  the  lemon  tree  and  no  smoking  and  fine  teas  and  there  were  some  little  tables  with 
chairs next to them and no one was sitting at one of the tables and it was in a corner and i sat down on one 
of the chairs next to it and i closed my eyes. and i put my hands in my pockets and toby climbed into 
my hand and i gave him two pellets of rat food from my bag and i gripped the swiss army knife in the 
other hand, and i groaned to cover up the noise because i had taken my hands off my ears, but not so loud 
that other people would hear me groaning and come and talk to me. 
 
and then i tried to think about what i had to do, but i couldn't think because there were too many other 
things in my head, so i did a maths problem to make my head clearer. 
 
and the maths problem that i did was called conway's soldiers. and in conway's soldiers you have a 
chessboard  that  continues  infinitely  in  all  directions  and  every  square  below  a  horizontal  line  has  a 
colored tile on it like this 
 

 
 
and you can move a colored tile only if it can jump over a colored tile horizontally or vertically (but not 
diagonally) into an empty square 2 squares away. and when you move a colored tile in this way you have 
to remove the colored tile that it jumped over, like this 
 

 

 
 
and you have to see how far you get the colored tiles above the starting horizontal line, and you start by 
doing something like this 
 

 

 
 
and then you do something like this 
 

 

 

 
 
and i know what the answer is because however you move the colored tiles you will never get a colored 
tile more than 4 squares above the starting horizontal line, but it is a good maths problem to do in your 
head when you don't want to think about something else because you can make it as complicated as you 
need to fill your brain by making the board as big as you want and the moves as complicated as you want. 
and i had got to 
 

 

 

and  then  i  looked  up  and  saw  that  there  was  a  policeman  standing  in  front  of  me  and  he  was  saying, 
"anyone at home?" but i didn't know what that meant. 
 
and then he said, "are you all right, young man?" 
 

 
i looked at him and i thought for a bit so that i would answer the question correctly and i said, "no." 
 
and he said, "you're looking a bit worse for wear." 
 
he had a gold ring on one of his fingers and it had curly letters on it but i couldn't see what the letters 
were. 
 
then he said, "the lady at the café says you've been here for 2½ hours, and when she tried talking to you, 
you were in a complete trance." 
 
then he said, "what's your name?" 
 
and i said, "christopher boone." 
 
and he said, "where do you live?" 
 
and i said, "36 randolph street," and i started feeling better because i like policemen and it was an easy 
question, and i wondered whether i should tell him that father killed wellington and whether he would 
arrest father. 
 
and he said, "what are you doing here?" 
 
and i said, "i needed to sit down and be quiet and think." 
 
and he said, "ok, let's keep it simple. what are you doing at the railway station?" 
 
and i said, "i'm going to see mother." 
 
and he said, "mother?" 
 
and i said, "yes, mother." 
 
and he said, "when's your train?" 
 
and i said, "i don't know. she lives in london. i don't know when there's a train to london." 
 
and he said, "so, you don't live with your mother?" 
 
and i said, "no. but i'm going to." 
 
and then he sat down next to me and said, "so, where does your mother live?" 
 
and i said, "in london." 
 
and he said, "yes, but where in london?" 
 
and i said, "451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng." 
 
and he said, "jesus. what is that?" 
 
and i looked down and i said, "that's my pet rat, toby," because he was looking out of my pocket at the 
policeman. 
 

and the policeman said, "a pet rat?" 
 
and i said, "yes, a pet rat. he's very clean and he hasn't got bubonic plague." 
 
and the policeman said, "well that's reassuring." 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and he said, "have you got a ticket?" 
 
and i said, "no." 
 
and he said, "have you got any money to get a ticket?" 
 
and i said, "no." 
 
and he said, "so, how precisely were you going to get to london, then?" 
 
and then i didn't know what to say because i had father's cashpoint card in my pocket and it was illegal 
to steal things, but he was a policeman so i had to tell the truth, so i said, "i have a cashpoint card," and i 
took it out of my pocket and i showed it to him. and this was a white lie. 
 
but the policeman said, "is this your card?" 
 
and then i thought he might arrest me, and i said, "no, it's father's." 
 
and he said, "father's?" 
 
and i said, "yes, father's." 
 
and  he  said,  "ok,"  but  he  said  it  really  slowly  and  he  squeezed  his  nose  between  his  thumb  and  his 
forefinger. 
 
and i said, "he told me the number," which was another white lie. 
 
and he said, "why don't you and i take a stroll to the cashpoint machine, eh?" 
 
and i said, "you mustn't touch me." 
 
and he said, "why would i want to touch you?" 
 
and i said, "i don't know." 
 
and he said, "well neither do i." 
 
and i said, "because i got a caution for hitting a policeman, but i didn't mean to hurt him and if i do it 
again i'll get into even bigger trouble." 
 
then he looked at me and he said, "you're serious, aren't you." 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and he said, "you lead the way." 
 

and i said, "where?" 
 
and he said, "back by the ticket office,"and he pointed with his thumb. 
 
and then we walked back through the tunnel, but it wasn't so frightening this time because there was a 
policeman with me. 
 
and  i  put  the  cashpoint  card  into  the  machine  like  father  had  let  me  do  sometimes  when  we  were 
shopping together and it said enter your personal number and i typed in 3558 and pressed 
the enter button and the machine said please enter amount and there was a choice 
 

 

 
 
and i asked the policeman, "how much does it cost to get a ticket for a train to london?" 
 
and he said, "about 30 quid." 
 
and i said, "is that pounds?" 
 
and he said, "christ alive," and he laughed. but i didn't laugh because i don't like people laughing at me, 
even if they are policemen. and he stopped laughing, and he said, "yep. it's 30 pounds." 
 
so i pressed £50 and five £10 notes came out of the machine, and a receipt, and i put the notes and the 
receipt and the card into my pocket. 
 
and the policeman said, "well, i guess i shouldn't keep you chatting any longer." 
 
and i said, "where do i get a ticket for the train from?" because if you are lost and you need directions 
you can ask a policeman. 
 
and he said, "you are a prize specimen, aren't you." 
 
and i said, "where do i get a ticket for the train from?" because he hadn't answered my question. 
 
and he said, "in there," and he pointed and there was a big room with a glass window on the other side of 
the train station door, and then he said, "now, are you sure you know what you're doing?" 
 
and i said, "yes. i'm going to london to live with my mother." 
 
and he said, "has your mother got a telephone number?" 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and he said, "and can you tell me what it is?" 
 
and i said, "yes. it's 0208 887 8907." 
 

and he said, "and you'll ring her if you get into any trouble, ok?" 
 
and i said, "yes," because i knew you could ring people from phone boxes if you had money, and i had 
money now. 
 
and he said, "good." 
 
and  i  walked  into  the  ticket  office  and  i  turned  round  and  i  could  see  that  the  policeman  was  still 
watching me so i felt safe. and there was a long desk at the other side of the big room and a window on 
the desk and there was a man standing in front of the window and there was a man behind the window, 
and i said to the man behind the window, "i want to go to london." 
 
and the man in front of the window said, "if you don't mind," and he turned round so that his back was 
toward  me  and  the  man  behind  the  window  gave  him  a  little  bit  of  paper  to  sign  and  he  signed  it  and 
pushed it back under the window and the man behind the window gave him a ticket. and then the man in 
front of the window looked at me and he said, "what the fuck are you looking at?" and then he walked 
away. 
 
and he had dreadlocks, which is what some black people have, but he was white, and dreadlocks is when 
you never wash your hair and it looks like old rope. and he had red trousers with stars on them. and i 
kept my hand on my swiss army knife in case he touched me. 
 
and then there was no one else in front of the window and i said to the man behind the window, "i want 
to go to london," and i hadn't been frightened when i was with the policeman but i turned round and i 
saw  that  he  had  gone  now  and  i  was  scared  again,  so  i  tried  to  pretend  i  was  playing  a  game  on  my 
computer and it was called train to london and it was like myst or the 11th hour, and you had to solve 
lots of different problems to get to the next level, and i could turn it off at any time. 
 
and the man said, "single or return?" 
 
and i said, "what does single or return mean?" 
 
and he said, "do you want to go one way, or do you want to go and come back?" 
 
and i said, "i want to stay there when i get there." 
 
and he said, "for how long?" 
 
and i said, "until i go to university." 
 
and he said, "single, then," and then he said, "that'll be £32." 
 
and i gave him the fifty pounds and he gave me £10 back and he said, "don't you go throwing it away." 
 
and then he gave me a little yellow and orange ticket and £8 in coins and i put it all in my pocket with 
my knife. and i didn't like the ticket being half yellow but i had to keep it because it was my train ticket. 
 
and then he said, "if you could move away from the counter." 
 
and i said, "when is the train to london?" 
 
and he looked at his watch and said, "platform 1, five minutes." 
 
and i said, "where is platform 1?" 

 
and he pointed and said, "through the underpass and up the stairs. you'll see the signs." 
 
and underpass meant tunnel because i could see where he was pointing, so i went out of the ticket office, 
but it wasn't like a computer game at all because i was in the middle of it and it was like all the signs were 
shouting  in  my  head  and  someone  bumped  into  me  as  they  walked  past  and  i  made  a  noise  like  a  dog 
barking to scare them off. 
 
and i pictured in my head a big red line across the floor which started at my feet and went through the 
tunnel  and  i  started  walking  along  the  red  line,  saying,  "left,  right,  left,  right,  left,  right,"  because 
sometimes when i am frightened or angry it helps if i do something that has a rhythm to it, like music or 
drumming, which is something siobhan taught me to do. 
 
and i went up the stairs and i saw a sign saying  platform 1 and the  was pointing at a glass door so i 
went through it, and someone bumped into me again with a suitcase and i made another noise like a dog 
barking, and they said, "watch where the hell you're going," but i pretended that they were just one of the 
guarding demons in train to london and there was a train. and i saw a man with a newspaper and a 
bag of golf clubs go up to one of the doors of the train and press a big button next to it and the doors were 
electronic and they slid open and i liked that. and then the doors closed behind him. 
 
and then i looked at my watch and 5 minutes had gone past since i was at the ticket office, which meant 
that the train would be going in 2 minutes. 
 
and then i went up to the door and i pressed the big button and the doors slid open and i stepped through 
the doors. 
 
and i was on the train to london. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

193: 

 
when  i  used  to  play  with  my  train  set  i  made  a  train  timetable  because  i  liked  timetables.  and  i  like 
timetables because i like to know when everything is going to happen. 
 
and this was my timetable when i lived at home with father and i thought that mother was dead from a 
heart attack (this was the timetable for a monday and also it is an approximation) 

7:20 a.m. wake up 
7:25 a.m. clean teeth and wash face  
7:30 a.m. give toby food and water 
7:40 a.m. have breakfast 
8:00 a.m. put school clothes on 
8:05 a.m. pack schoolbag 
8:10 a.m. read book or watch video 
8:32 a.m. catch bus to school 
8:43 a.m. go past tropical fish shop 
8:51 a.m. arrive at school 
9:00 a.m. school assembly 
9:15 a.m. first morning class 
10:30 a.m. break 
10:50 a.m. art class with mrs. peters 13 
12:30 p.m. lunch 
1:00 p.m. first afternoon class 
2:15 p.m. second afternoon class 
3:30 p.m. catch school bus home 
3:49 p.m. get off school bus at home 
3:50 p.m. have juice and snack 
3:55 p.m. give toby food and water 
4:00 p.m. take toby out of his cage 
4:18 p.m. put toby into his cage 
4:20 p.m. watch television or video 
5:00 p.m. read a book 
6:00 p.m. have tea 
6:30 p.m. watch television or a video 
7:00 p.m. do maths practice 
8:00 p.m. have a bath 
8:15 p.m. get changed into pajamas 
8:20 p.m. play computer games 
9:00 p.m. watch television or a video 
9:20 p.m. have juice and a snack 
9:30 p.m. go to bed 

and at the weekend i make up my own timetable and i write it down on a piece of cardboard and i put it 
up on the wall. and it says things like feed toby or do maths or go to the shop to buy sweets. and that 
is one of the other reasons why i don't like france, because when people are on holiday they don't have a 
timetable and i had to get mother and father to tell me every morning exactly what we were going to do 
that day to make me feel better. 
 
because  time  is  not  like  space.  and  when  you  put  something  down  somewhere,  like  a  protractor  or  a 
biscuit, you can have a map in your head to tell you where you have left it, but even if you don't have a 
map it will still be there because a map is a representation of things that actually exist so you can find the 

protractor or the biscuit again. and a timetable is a map of time, except that if you don't have a timetable 
time  is  not  there  like  the  landing  and  the  garden  and  the  route  to  school.  because  time  is  only  the 
relationship  between  the  way  different  things  change,  like  the  earth  going  round  the  sun  and  atoms 
vibrating and clocks ticking and day and night and waking up and going to sleep, and it is like west or 
nor-nor-east,  which  won't  exist  when  the  earth  stops  existing  and  falls  into  the  sun  because  it  is  only  a 
relationship  between  the  north  pole  and  the  south  pole  and  everywhere  else,  like  mogadishu  and 
sunderland and canberra. 
 
and it isn't a fixed relationship like the relationship between our house and mrs. shears's house, or like 
the relationship between 7 and 865, but it depends on how fast you are going relative to a specific point. 
and if you go off in a spaceship and you travel near the speed of light, you may come back and find that 
all your family is dead and you are still young and it will be the future but your clock will say that you 
have only been away for a few days or months. 
 
and because nothing can travel faster than the speed of light, this means that we can only know about a 
fraction of the things that go on in the universe, like this 
 

 

 
 
and this is a map of everything and everywhere, and the future is on the right and the past is on the left 
and the gradient of the line c is the speed of light, but we can't know about the things which happen in the 
shaded areas even though some of them have already happened, but when we get to f it will be possible to 
find out about things which happen in the lighter areas p and q. 
 
and  this  means  that  time  is  a  mystery,  and  not  even  a  thing,  and  no  one  has  ever  solved  the  puzzle  of 
what time is, exactly. and so, if you get lost in time it is like being lost in a desert, except that you can't 
see the desert because it is not a thing. 
 
and this is why i like timetables, because they make sure you don't get lost in time. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

197: 

 
there  were  lots  of  people  on  the  train,  and  i  didn't  like  that,  because  i  don't  like  lots  of  people  i  don't 
know and i hate it even more if i am stuck in a room with lots of people i don't know, and a train is like a 
room and you can't get out of it when it's moving. and it made me think of when i had to come home in 
the car from school one day because the bus had broken down and mother came and picked me up and 
mrs. peters asked mother if she could take jack and polly home because their mothers couldn't come and 
pick them up, and mother said yes. but i started screaming in the car because there were too many people 
in it and jack and polly weren't in my class and jack bangs his head on things and makes a noise like an 
animal, and i tried to get out of the car, but it was still going along and i fell out onto the road and i had to 
have stitches in my head and they had to shave the hair off and it took 5 months for it to grow back to the 
way it was before. 
 
so i stood very still in the train carriage and didn't move. and then i heard someone say "christopher." 
and i thought it would be someone i knew, like a teacher from school or one of the people who live in 
our street, but it wasn't. it was the policeman again. and he said, "caught you just in time," and he was 
breathing really loud and holding his knees. 
 
and i didn't say anything. 
 
and he said, "we've got your father at the police station." 
 
and i thought he was going to say that they had arrested father for killing wellington, but he didn't. he 
said, "he's looking for you." 
 
and i said, "i know." 
 
and he said, "so, why are you going to london?" 
 
and i said, "because i'm going to live with mother." 
 
and he said, "well, i think your father might have something to say about that." 
 
and then i thought that he was going to take me back to father and that was frightening because he was a 
policeman  and  policemen  are  meant  to  be  good,  so  i  started  to  run  away,  but  he  grabbed  me  and  i 
screamed. and then he let go. 
 
and he said, "ok, let's not get overexcited here." and then he said, "i'm going to take you back to the 
police station and you and me and your dad can sit down and have a little chat about who's going where." 
 
and i said, "i'm going to live with mother, in london." 
 
and he said, "not just yet you're not." 
 
and i said, "have you arrested father?" 
 
and he said, "arrested him? what for?" 
 
and i said, "he killed a dog. with a garden fork. the dog was called wellington." 
 
and the policeman said, "did he now?" 
 
and i said, "yes, he did." 

 
 
and he said, "well, we can talk about that as well." and then he said, "right, young man, i think you've 
done enough adventuring for one day." 
 
and then he reached out to touch me again and i started to scream again, and he said, "now listen, you 
little monkey. you can either do what i say or i am going to have to make --" 
 
and then the train jiggled and it began to move. 
 
and then the policeman said, "shitting fuck." 
 
and  then  he  looked  at  the  ceiling  of  the  train  and  he  put  his  hands  together  in  front  of  his  mouth  like 
people do when they are praying to god in heaven and he breathed really loudly into his hands and made 
a whistling noise, and then he stopped because the train jiggled again and he had to grab hold of one of 
the straps which were hanging from the ceiling. 
 
and then he said, "don't move." 
 
and then he took out his walkie-talkie and pressed a button and said, "rob. . . ? yeah, it's nigel. i'm stuck 
on the bloody train. yeah. don't even. . . look. it stops at didcot parkway. so, if you can get someone to 
meet me with a car. . . cheers. tell his old man we've got him but it's going to take a while, ok? great." 
 
and then he clicked his walkie-talkie off and he said, "let's get ourselves a seat," and he pointed to two 
long seats nearby which faced each other, and he said, "park yourself. and no monkey business." 
 
and the people who were sitting on the seats got up and walked away because he was a policeman and 
we sat down facing one another. 
 
and he said, "you are a bloody handful, you are. jeez." 
 
and i wondered whether the policeman would help me find 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng. 
 
and  i  looked  out  of  the  window  and  we  were  going  past  factories  and  scrap  yards  full  of  old  cars  and 
there were 4 caravans in a muddy field with 2 dogs and some clothes hanging up to dry. 
 
and outside the window was like a map, except that it was in 3 dimensions and it was life-size because it 
was the thing it was a map of. and there were so many things it made my head hurt, so i closed my eyes, 
but  then  i  opened  them  again  because  it  was  like  flying,  but  nearer  to  the  ground,  and  i  think  flying  is 
good. and then the countryside started and there were fields and cows and horses and a bridge and a farm 
and  more  houses  and  lots  of  little  roads  with cars  on  them.  and  that  made  me  think  that  there  must  be 
millions of miles of train track in the world and they all go past houses and roads and rivers and fields, 
and  that  made  me  think  how  many  people  must  be  in  the  world  and  they  all  have  houses  and  roads  to 
travel on and cars and pets and clothes and they all eat lunch and go to bed and have names and this made 
my head hurt, too, so i closed my eyes again and did counting and groaning. 
 
and when i opened my eyes the policeman was reading a newspaper called the sun, and on the front of 
the paper it said £3m anderson's call girl shame and it had a picture of a man and a picture of a lady 
in a bra underneath. 
 
and then i did some maths practice in my head, solving quadratic equations using the formula 
 

 

 
and then i wanted to go for a wee, but i was on a train. and i didn't know how long it would take us to 
get to london and i felt a panic starting, and i started to tap a rhythm on the glass with my knuckles to 
help me wait and not think about wanting to go for a wee, and i looked at my watch and i waited for 17 
minutes, but when i want to go for a wee i have to go really quickly, which is why i like to be at home or 
at  school  and  i  always  go  for  a  wee  before  i  get  on  the  bus,  which  is  why  i  leaked  a  bit  and  wet  my 
trousers. 
 
and  then  the  policeman  looked  across  at  me  and  said,  "oh  christ,  you've.  .  ."  and  then  he  put  his 
newspaper down and said, "for god's sake go to the bloody toilet, will you." 
 
and i said, "but i'm on a train." 
 
and he said, "they do have toilets on trains, you know." 
 
and i said, "where is the toilet on the train?" 
 
and he pointed and said, "through those doors there. but i'll be keeping an eye on you, understand?" 
 
and i said, "no," because i knew what keeping an eye on someone meant but he couldn't look at me when 
i was in the toilet. 
 
and he said, "just go to the bloody toilet." 
 
so i got up out of my seat and i closed my eyes so that my eyelids were just little slits so i couldn't see the 
other  people  on  the  train  and  i  walked  to  the  door,  and  when  i  got  through  the  door  there  was  another 
door on the right and it was half open and it said toilet on it, so i went inside. 
 
and it was horrible inside because there was poo on the seat of the toilet and it smelled of poo, like the 
toilet at school when joseph has been for a poo on his own, because he plays with it. 
 
and  i  didn't  want  to  use  the  toilet  because  of  the  poo,  which  was  the  poo  of  people  i  didn't  know  and 
brown, but i had to because i really wanted to wee. so i closed my eyes and went for a wee and the train 
wobbled and lots went on the seat and on the floor, but i wiped my penis with toilet paper and flushed the 
toilet and then i tried to use the sink but the tap didn't work, so i put spit on my hands and wiped them 
with a paper tissue and put it into the toilet. 
 
then i went out of the toilet  and i saw that opposite the  toilet there were two shelves with  cases and  a 
rucksack  on  them  and  it  made  me  think  of  the  airing  cupboard  at  home  and  how  i  climb  in  there 
sometimes  and  it  makes  me  feel  safe.  so  i  climbed  onto  the  middle shelf  and  i  pulled  one  of  the  cases 
across  like  a  door  so  that  i  was  shut  in,  and  it  was  dark  and  there  was  no  one  in  there  with  me  and  i 
couldn't hear people talking so i felt much calmer and it was nice. 
 
and i did some more quadratic equations like 

0 = 437x2 + 103x + 11 

and 

0 = 79x2 + 43x + 2089 

and i made some of the coefficients large so that they were hard to solve. 
 
and then the train started to slow down and someone came and stood near the shelf and knocked on the 
door of the toilet, and it was the policeman and he said, "christopher. . . ? christopher. . . ?" and then he 
opened  the  door  of  the  toilet  and  said,  "bloody  hell,"  and  he  was  really  close  so  that  i  could  see  his 
walkie-talkie  and  his  truncheon  on  his  belt  and  i  could  smell  his  aftershave,  but  he didn't  see  me  and  i 
didn't say anything because i didn't want him to take me to father. 
 
and then he went away again, running. 
 
and then the train stopped and i wondered if it was london, but i didn't move because i didn't want the 
policeman to find me. 
 
and then a lady with a jumper that had bees and flowers made of wool on it came and took the rucksack 
off the shelf over my head and she said, "you scared the living daylights out of me." 
 
but i didn't say anything. 
 
and then she said, "i think someone's out there on the platform looking for you." 
 
but i carried on not saying anything. 
 
and she said, "well, it's your lookout," and she went away. 
 
and then 3 other people walked past and one of them was a black man in a long white dress and he put a 
big parcel on the shelf above my head but he didn't see me. 
 
and then the train started going again. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

199: 

 
people  believe  in  god  because  the  world  is  very  complicated  and  they  think  it  is  very  unlikely  that 
anything as complicated as a flying squirrel or the human eye or a brain could happen by chance. but they 
should  think  logically  and  if  they  thought  logically  they  would  see  that  they  can  only  ask  this  question 
because it has already happened and they exist. and there are billions of planets where there is no life, but 
there is no one on those planets with brains to notice. and it is like if everyone in the world was tossing 
coins eventually someone would get 5,698 heads in a row and they would think they were very special. 
but they wouldn't be because there would be millions of people who didn't get 5,698 heads. 
 
and there is life on earth because of an accident. but it is a very special kind of accident. and for this 
accident to happen in this special way, there have to be 3 conditions. and these are 

1.  things have to make copies of themselves (this is called replication)  
2.  they have to make small mistakes when they do this (this is called mutation)  
3.  these mistakes have to be the same in their copies (this is called heritability)  

 
and these conditions are very rare, but they are possible, and they cause life. and it just happens. but it 
doesn't have to end up with rhinoceroses and human beings and whales. it could end up with anything. 
 
and, for example, some people say how can an eye happen by accident? because an eye has to evolve 
from something else very like an eye and it doesn't just happen because of a genetic mistake, and what is 
the use of half an eye? but half an eye is very useful because half an eye means that an animal can see 
half of an animal that wants to eat it and get out of the way, and it will eat the animal that only has a third 
of an eye or 49% of an eye instead because it hasn't got out of the way quick enough, and the animal that 
is eaten won't have babies because it is dead. and 1% of an eye is better than no eye. 
 
and people who believe in god think god has put human beings on the earth because they think human 
beings are the best animal, but human beings are just an animal and they will evolve into another animal, 
and  that  animal  will  be  cleverer  and  it  will  put  human  beings  into  a  zoo,  like  we  put  chimpanzees  and 
gorillas  into  a  zoo.  or  human  beings  will  all  catch  a  disease  and  die  out  or  they  will  make  too  much 
pollution  and kill themselves,  and then there will only be insects in  the world and they will be the best 
animal. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

211: 

 
then i wondered whether i should have got off the train because it had just stopped at london, and i was 
scared because if the train went anywhere else it would be somewhere where i didn't know anybody. 
 
and then somebody went to the toilet and then they came out again, but they didn't see me. and i could 
smell their poo, and it was different from the smell of the poo that i smelled in the toilet when i went in 
there. 
 
and then i closed my eyes and did some more maths puzzles so i didn't think about where i was going. 
 
and then the train stopped again, and i thought about getting off the shelf and going to get my bag and 
get off the train. but i didn't want to be found by the policeman and be taken to father, so i stayed on the 
shelf and didn't move, and no one saw me this time. 
 
and then i remembered that there was a map on the wall of one of the classrooms at school, and it was a 
map of england and scotland and wales and it showed you where all the towns were and i pictured it in 
my head with swindon and london on it, and it was like this in my head 
 

 

 

 
 
 
and i had been looking at my watch since the train had started at 12:59 p.m. and the first stop had been 
at 1:16 p.m., which was 17 minutes later. and it was now 1:39 p.m., which was 23 minutes after the stop, 
which meant that we would be at the sea if the train didn't go in a big curve. but i didn't know if it went in 
a big curve. 
 
and  then  there  were  another  4  stops  and  4  people  came  and  took  bags  away  from  the  shelves  and  2 
people put bags on the shelves, but no one moved the big suitcase that was in front of me and only one 
person saw me and they said, "you are fucking weird, mate," and that was a man in a suit. and 6 people 
went to the toilet but they didn't do poos that i could smell, which was good. 
 
and then the train stopped and a lady with a yellow waterproof coat came and took the big suitcase away 
and she said, "have you touched this?" 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and then she went away. 
 
and then a man stood next to the shelf and said, "come and look at this, barry. they've got, like, a train 
elf." 
 
and another man came and stood next to him and said, "well, we have both been drinking." 

 
and the first man said, "perhaps we should feed him some nuts." 
 
and the second man said, "you're the one who's bloody nuts." 
 
and the first one said, "come on, shift it, you daft cunt. i need more beers before i sober up." 
 
and then they went away. 
 
and then the train was really quiet and it didn't move again and i couldn't hear anyone. so i decided to get 
off the shelf and go and get my bag and see if the policeman was still sitting in his seat. 
 
so i got off the shelf and i looked through the door, but the policeman wasn't there. and my bag had gone 
as well, which had toby's food in it and my maths books and my clean pants and vest and shirt and the 
orange juice and the milk and the custard creams and the baked beans. 
 
and then i heard the sound of feet and i turned round and it was another policeman, not the one who was 
on the train before, and i could see him through the door, in the next carriage, and he was looking under 
the seats. and i decided that i didn't like policemen so much anymore, so i got off the train. 
 
and when i saw how big the room was that the train was in and i heard how noisy and echoey it was, i 
had  to  kneel  down  on  the  ground  for  a bit  because  i  thought  i  was  going  to  fall  over.  and  when  i  was 
kneeling on the ground i worked out which way to walk, and i decided to walk in the direction the train 
was going when it came into the station because if this was the last stop, that was the direction london 
was in. 
 
so i stood up and i imagined that there was a big red line on the ground which ran parallel to the train to 
the gate at the far end and i walked along it and i said, "left, right, left, right. . ." again, like before. 
 
and when i got to the gate a man said to me, "i think someone's looking for you, sonny." 
 
and i said, "who's looking for me?" because i thought it might be mother and the policeman in swindon 
had phoned her up with the phone number i told him. 
 
but he said, "a policeman." 
 
and i said, "i know." 
 
and  he  said,  "oh.  right."  and  then  he  said,  "you  wait  here,  then,  and  i'll  go  and  tell  them,"  and  he 
walked back down the side of the train. 
 
so i carried on walking. and i could still feel the feeling like a balloon inside my chest and it hurt and i 
covered my ears with my hands and i went and stood against the wall of a little shop which said hotel 
and theatre reservations tel: 0207 402 5164 in the middle of the big room and then i took my hands 
away from my ears and i groaned to block out the noise and i looked round the big room at all the signs to 
see if this was london. and the signs said 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
but after a few seconds they looked like this 
 

 

 

 

because there were too many and my brain wasn't working properly and this frightened me so i closed my 
eyes again and i counted slowly to 50 but without doing the cubes. and i stood there and i opened  my 
swiss army knife in my pocket to make me feel safe and i held on to it tight. 
 
and then i made my hand into a little tube with my fingers and i opened my eyes and i looked through 
the  tube  so  that  i  was  only  looking  at  one  sign  at  a  time  and  after  a  long  time  i  saw  a  sign  that  said 
information and it was above a window on a little shop. 
 
and a man came up to me and he was wearing a blue jacket and blue trousers and he had brown shoes 
and he was carrying a book in his hand and he said, "you look lost." 
 
so i took out my swiss army knife. 
 
and he said, "whoa. whoa. whoa. whoa. whoa," and held up both his hands with his fingers stretched 
out in a fan, like he wanted me to stretch my fingers out in a fan and touch his fingers because he wanted 
to say he loved me, but he did it with both hands, not one like father and mother, and i didn't know who 
he was. 
 
and then he walked away backward. 

 
so i went to the shop that said information and i could feel my heart beating very hard and i could hear a 
noise like the sea in my ears. and when i got to the window i said, "is this london?" but there was no one 
behind the window. 
 
and  then  someone  sat  behind  the  window  and  she  was  a  lady  and  she  was  black  and  she  had  long 
fingernails which were painted pink and i said, "is this london?" 
 
and she said, "sure is, honey." 
 
and i said, "is this london?" 
 
and she said, "indeed it is." 
 
and i said, "how do i get to 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng?" 
 
and she said, "where is that?" 
 
and i said, "it's 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng. and sometimes you can write it 451c chapter 
road, willesden, london nw2 5ng." 
 
and  the  lady  said  to  me,  "take  the  tube  to  willesden  junction,  honey.  or  willesden  green.  got  to  be 
near there somewhere." 
 
and i said, "what sort of tube?" 
 
and she said, "are you for real?" 
 
and i didn't say anything. 
 
and  she  said,  "over  there.  see  that  big  staircase  with  the  escalators?  see  the  sign?  says  underground. 
take the bakerloo line to willesden junction or the jubilee to willesden green. you ok, honey?" 
 
and i looked where she was pointing and there was a big staircase going down into the ground and there 
was a big sign over the top of it like this 
 

 

 
and i thought, "i can do this," because i was doing really well and i was in london and i would find my 
mother. and i had to think to myself, "the people are like cows in a field," and i just had to look in front 
of me all the time and make a red line along the floor in the picture of the big room in my head and follow 
it. 
 
and  i  walked  across  the  big  room  to  the  escalators.  and  i  kept  hold  of  my  swiss  army  knife  in  my 
pocket and i held on to toby in my other pocket to make sure he didn't escape. 
 
and the escalators was a staircase but it was moving and people stepped onto it and it carried them down 
and up and it made me laugh because i hadn't been on one before and it was like something in a science 
fiction film about the future. but i didn't want to use it so i went down the stairs instead. 

 
and then i was in a smaller room underground and there were lots of people and there were pillars which 
had blue lights in the ground around the bottom of them and i liked these but i didn't like the people, so i 
saw a photo booth like one i went into on 25 march 1994 to have my passport photo done, and i went into 
the photo booth because it was like a cupboard and it felt safer and i could look out through the curtain. 
 
and i did detecting by watching and i saw that people were putting tickets into gray gates and walking 
through. and some of them were buying tickets at big black machines on the wall. 
 
and i watched 47 people do this and i memorized what to do. then i imagined a red line on the floor and 
i walked over to the wall where there was a poster which was a list of places to go and it was alphabetical 
and i saw willesden green and it said £2:20 and then i went to one of the machines and there was a little 
screen which said press ticket type and i pressed the button that most people had pressed, which 
was adult single and £2:20, and the screen said insert £2:20 and i put three £1 coins into the 
slot and there was a clinking noise and the screen said take ticket and change and there was a 
ticket in a little hole at the bottom of the machine and a 50p coin and a 20p coin and a l0p coin and i put 
the  coins  in  my  pocket  and  i  went  up  to  one  of  the  gray  gates  and  i  put  my  ticket  into  the  slot  and  it 
sucked it in and it came out on the other side of the gate. and someone said, "get a move on," and i made 
the noise like a dog barking and i walked forward and the gate opened this time and i took my ticket like 
other people did and i liked the gray gate because that was like something in a science fiction film about 
the future, too. 
 
and  then  i  had  to  work  out  which  way  to  go,  so  i  stood  against  a  wall  so  people  didn't  touch  me,  and 
there was a sign for bakerloo line and district and circle line but not one for jubilee line like the 
lady had said, so i made a plan and it was to go to willesden junction on the bakerloo line. 
 
and there was another sign for bakerloo line and it was like this 
 

 

 
 
and i read all the words and i found willesden junction, so i followed the arrow that said 
and i went 
through  the  left-hand  tunnel  and  there  was  a  fence  down  the  middle  of  the  tunnel  and  the  people  were 
walking straight ahead on the left and coming the other way on the right like on a road, so i walked along 
the left and the tunnel curved left and then there were more gates and a sign said bakerloo line and it 
pointed down an escalator, so i had to go down the escalators and i had to hold on to the rubber rail but 
that  moved  too  so  i  didn't  fall  over  and  people  were,  standing  close  to  me  and  i  wanted  to  hit  them  to 
make them go away but i didn't hit them because of the caution. 
 
and  then  i  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  escalators  and  i  had  to  jump  off  and  i  tripped  and  bumped  into 
someone and they said, "easy," and there were two ways to go and one said northbound and i went that 
way because willesden was on the top half of the map and the top is always north on maps. 
 
and then i was in another train station but it was tiny and it was in a tunnel and there was only one track 
and the walls were curved and they were covered in big adverts and they said way out and london's 
transport  museum  and  take  time  out  to  regret  your  career  choice  and  jamaica  and  british 

rail  and  no  smoking  and  be  moved  and  be  moved  and  be  moved  and  for  stations  beyond 
queen's park take the first train and change at queen's park if necessary and hammersmith and 
city  line and  you're  closer  than my  family  ever  gets. and there  were lots of people standing in the 
little station and it was underground so there weren't any windows and i didn't like that, so i found a seat 
which was a bench and i sat at the end of the bench. 
 
and then lots of people started coming into the little station. and someone sat down on the other end of 
the bench and it was a lady who had a black briefcase and purple shoes and a brooch shaped like a parrot. 
and the people kept coming into the little station so that it was even more crowded than the big station. 
and then i couldn't see the walls anymore and the back of someone's jacket touched my knee and i felt 
sick  and  i  started  groaning  really  loudly  and the  lady  on the  bench  stood  up  and  no  one  else  sat  down. 
and i felt like i felt like when i had flu and i had to stay in bed all day and all of me hurt and i couldn't 
walk or eat or go to sleep or do maths. 
 
and then there was a sound like people fighting with swords and i could feel a strong wind and a roaring 
started and i closed my eyes and the roaring got louder and i groaned really loudly but i couldn't block it 
out of my ears and i thought the little station was going to collapse or there was a big fire somewhere and 
i was going to die. and then the roaring turned into a clattering and a squealing and it got slowly quieter 
and then it stopped and i kept  my eyes closed because i felt safer not seeing what was happening. and 
then i could hear people moving again because it was quieter. and i opened my eyes but i couldn't see 
anything at first because there were too many people. and then i saw that they were getting onto a train 
that wasn't there before and it was the train which was the roaring. and there was sweat running down my 
face from under my hair and i was moaning, not groaning, but different, like a dog when it has hurt its 
paw, and i heard the sound but i didn't realize it was me at first. 
 
and then the train doors closed and the train started moving and it roared again but not as loud this time 
and 5 carriages went past and it went into the tunnel at the end of the little station and it was quiet again 
and the people were all walking into the tunnels that went out of the little station. 
 
and i was shaking  and i wanted to  be back at home,  and then i realized i couldn't be at home because 
father was there and he told a lie and he killed wellington, which meant that it wasn't my home anymore, 
my home was 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng, and it scared me, having a wrong thought like, "i 
wish i was back at home again," because it meant my mind wasn't working properly. 
 
and then more people came into the little station and it became fuller and then the roaring began again 
and i closed my eyes and i sweated and felt sick and i felt the feeling like a balloon inside my chest and it 
was so big i found it hard to breathe. and then the people went away on the train and the little station was 

empty again. and then it filled up with people and another train came with the same roaring. and it was 
exactly like having flu that time because i wanted it to stop, like you can just pull the plug of a computer 
out of the wall if it crashes, because i wanted to go to sleep so that i wouldn't have to think because the 
only thing i could think was how much it hurt because there was no room for anything else in my head, 
but i couldn't go to sleep and i just had to sit there and there was nothing to do except to wait and to hurt. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

223: 

 
and this is another description because siobhan said i should do descriptions and it is a description of the 
advert that was on the wall of the little train station opposite me, but i can't remember all of it because i 
thought i was going to die. and the advert said 

dream holiday,  

think kuoni  
in malaysia 

and behind the writing there was a big photograph of 2 orangutans and they were swinging on branches 
and  there  were  trees  behind  them  but  the  leaves  were  blurred  because  the  camera  was  focusing  on  the 
orangutans and not the leaves and the orangutans were moving. 
 
and  orangutan  comes  from  the  malaysian  word  oranghutan,  which  means  man  of  the  woods,  but 
oranghutan isn't malaysian for orangutan. 
 
and adverts are pictures or television programs  to  make you buy things like  cars or snickers or use an 
internet service provider. but this was an advert to make you go to malaysia on a holiday. and malaysia 
is in southeast asia and it is made up of peninsular malaysia and sabah and sarawak and labuan and the 
capital  is  kuala  lumpur  and  the  highest  mountain  is  mount  kinabalu,  which  is  4,101  meters  high,  but 
that wasn't on the advert. 
 
and siobhan says people go on holidays to see new things and relax, but it wouldn't make me relaxed and 
you can see new things by looking at earth under a  microscope or drawing the shape of the solid  made 
when 3 circular rods of equal thickness intersect at right angles. and i think that there are so many things 
just  in  one  house  that  it  would  take  years  to  think  about  all  of  them  properly.  and  also,  a  thing  is 
interesting because of thinking about it and not because of being new. for example, siobhan showed me 
that you can wet your finger and rub the edge of a thin glass and make a singing noise. and you can put 
different amounts of water in different glasses and they make different notes because they have what are 
called different resonant frequencies, and you can play a tune like three blind mice. and lots of people 
have thin glasses in their houses and they don't know you can do this. 
 
and the advert said 

malaysia, truly asia. 
 
stimulated by the sights and smells, you realise that you have arrived in a land of contrasts. you seek out 
the traditional, the natural and the cosmopolitan. your memories stretch from city days to nature reserves 
to lazy hours on the beach. prices from £575 per person. 
 
call us on 01306 747000, see your travel agent or visit the world at www.kuoni.co.uk. 
 
a world of difference. 

and there were three other pictures, and they were very small, and they were a palace and a beach and a 
palace. and this is what the orangutans looked like 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

227: 

 
and i kept my eyes closed and i didn't look at my watch at all. and the trains coming in and out of the 
station were in a rhythm, like music or drumming. and it was like counting and saying, "left, right, left, 
right, left, right. . ." which siobhan taught me to do to make myself calm. and i was saying in my head, 
"train coming. train stopped. train going. silence. train coming. train stopped. train going. . ." as if 
the trains were only in my mind. and normally i don't imagine things that aren't happening because it is a 
lie and it makes me feel scared, but it was better than watching the trains coming in and out of the station 
because that made me feel even more scared. 
 
and i didn't open my eyes and i didn't look at my watch. and it was like being in a dark room with the 
curtains closed so i couldn't see anything, like when you wake up at night and the only sounds you hear 
are the sounds inside your head. and that made it better because it was like the little station wasn't there, 
outside my head, but i was in bed and i was safe. 
 
and then the silences between the trains coming and going got longer and longer. and i could hear that 
there were fewer people in the little station when the train wasn't there, so i opened my eyes and i looked 
at  my  watch  and  it  said  8:07  p.m.  and  i had  been  sitting  on  the  bench  for approximately  5  hours  but  it 
hadn't seemed like approximately 5 hours, except that my bottom hurt and i was hungry and thirsty. 
 
and then i realized that toby was missing because he was not in my pocket, and i didn't want him to be 
missing because we weren't in father's house or mother's house and there wasn't anyone to feed him in 
the little station and he would die and he might get run over by a train. 
 
and then i looked up at the ceiling and i saw that there was a long black box which was a sign and it said 
 

 
 
and then the bottom line scrolled up and disappeared and a different line scrolled up into its place and the 
sign said 
 

 

 
 
and then it changed again and it said 
 

 
 

 

 

and  then  i  heard  the  sound  like  sword  fighting  and  the  roaring  of  a  train  coming  into  the  station  and  i 
worked  out  that  there  was  a  big  computer  somewhere  and  it  knew  where  all  the  trains  were  and  it  sent 
messages to the black boxes in the little stations to say when the trains were coming, and that made me 
feel better because everything had an order and a plan. 
 
and the train came into the little station and it stopped and 5 people got onto the train and another person 
ran into the little station and got on, and 7 people got off the train and then the doors closed automatically 
and the train went away. and when the next train came i wasn't so scared anymore because the sign said 
 

 

 

so i knew it was going to happen. 
 
and then i decided that i would look for toby because there were only 3 people in the little station. so i 
stood  up  and  i  looked  up  and  down  the  little  station  and  in  the  doorways  that  went  into  tunnels  but  i 
couldn't see him anywhere. and then i looked down into the black lower-down bit where the rails were. 
 
and then i saw two mice and they were black because they were covered in dirt. and i liked that because 
i like mice and rats. but they weren't toby, so i carried on looking. 
 
and  then  i  saw  toby,  and  he  was  also  in  the  lower-down  bit  where  the  rails  were,  and  i  knew  he  was 
toby  because  he  was  white  and  he  had  a  brown  egg  shape  on  his  back.  so  i  climbed  down  off  the 
concrete. and he was eating a bit of rubbish that was an old sweet paper. and someone shouted, "jesus. 
what are you doing?" 
 
and i bent down to catch toby but he ran off. and i walked after him and i bent down again and i said, 
"toby. . . toby. . . toby," and i held out my hand so that he could smell my hand and smell that it was 
me. 
 
and someone said, "get out of there, for fuck's sake," and i looked up and it was a man who was wearing 
a  green  raincoat  and  he  had  black  shoes  and  his  socks  were  showing  and  they  were  gray  with  little 
diamond patterns on them. 
 
and i said, "toby. . . toby. . ." but he ran off again. 
 
and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks tried to grab my shoulder, so i screamed. and then i 
heard the sound like sword fighting and toby started running again, but this time he ran the other way, 
which was past my feet, and i grabbed at him and i caught him by the tail. 
 
and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks said, "oh christ. oh christ." 
 
and then i heard the roaring and i lifted toby up and grabbed him with both hands and he bit me on my 
thumb and there was blood coming out and i shouted and toby tried to jump out of my hands. 
 
and then the roaring got louder and i turned round and i saw the train coming out of the tunnel and i was 
going to be run over and killed so i tried to climb up onto the concrete but it was high and i was holding 
toby in both my hands. 
 
and  then  the  man  with  the  diamond  patterns  on  his  socks  grabbed  hold  of  me  and  pulled  me  and  i 
screamed, but he kept pulling me and he pulled me up onto the concrete and we fell over and i carried on 
screaming because he had hurt my shoulder. and then the train came into the station and i stood up and i 

ran  to  the  bench  again  and  i  put  toby  into  the  pocket  inside  my  jacket  and  he  went  very  quiet  and  he 
didn't move. 
 
and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks was standing next to me and he said, "what the fuck 
do you think you were playing at?" 
 
but i didn't say anything. 
 
and he said, "what were you doing?" 
 
and the doors of the train opened and people got off and there was a lady standing behind the man with 
the diamond patterns on his socks and she was carrying a guitar case like siobhan has. 
 
and i said, "i was finding toby. he's my pet rat." 
 
and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks said, "fucking nora." 
 
and the lady with the guitar case said, "is he ok?" 
 
and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks said, "him? thanks a fucking bundle. jesus christ. 
a pet rat. oh shit. my train." and then he ran to the train and he banged on the door, which was closed, 
and the train started to go away and he said, "fuck." 
 
and the lady said, "are you ok?" and she touched my arm so i screamed again. 
 
and she said, "ok. ok. ok." 
 
and there was a sticker on her guitar case and it said 
 

 

 
and i was sitting on the ground and the woman knelt down on one knee and she said, "is there anything i 
can do to help you?" 
 
and if she was a teacher at school i could have said, "where is 451c chapter road, willesden, london 
nw2  5ng?"  but  she  was  a  stranger,  so  i  said,  "stand  further  away,"  because  i  didn't  like  her  being  so 
close. and i said, "i've got a swiss army knife and it has a saw blade and it could cut someone's fingers 
off." 
 
and she said, "ok, buddy. i'm going to take that as a no," and she stood up and walked away. 
 
 
and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks said, "mad as a fucking hatter. jesus," and he was 
pressing a handkerchief against his face and there was blood on the handkerchief. 
 

and then another train came and the man with the diamond patterns on his socks and the lady with the 
guitar case got on and it went away again. 
 
and then 8 more trains came and i decided that i would get onto a train and then i would work out what 
to do. 
 
so i got on the next train. 
 
and toby tried to get out of my pocket so i took hold of him and i put him in my outside pocket and i 
held him with my hand. 
 
and there were 11 people in the carriage and i didn't like being in a room with 11 people in a tunnel, so i 
concentrated on things in the carriage. and there were signs saying there are 53,963 holiday cottages in 
scandinavia and germany and vitabiotics and 3435 and penalty £10 if you fail to show a valid 
ticket for your entire journey and discover gold, then bronze and tvic and epbic and suck my 
cock  and  ostructing  the  doors  can  be  dangerous  and  brv  and  con.  ic  and  talk  to  the 
world. 
 
and there was a pattern on the walls which was like this 
 

 
 
and there was a pattern on the seats like this 
 

 

 

 
 
then the train wobbled a lot and i had to hang on to a rail and we went into a tunnel and it was noisy and 
i closed my eyes and i could feel the blood pumping in the sides of my neck. 
 
and  then  we  came  out  of  the  tunnel  and  went  into  another  little  station  and  it  was  called  warwick 
avenue and it said it in big letters on the wall and i liked that because you knew where you were. 
 

and  i  timed  the  distance  between  stations  all  the  way  to  willesden  junction  and  all  the  times  between 
stations were multiples of 15 seconds like this 

0:00 paddington 
1:30 warwick avenue 
3:15 maida vale 
5:00 kilburn park 
7:00 queen's park 
10:30 kensal green 
11:45 willesden junction 

and when the train stopped at willesden junction and the doors opened automatically i walked out of 
the train. and then the doors closed and the train went away. and everyone who got off the train walked 
up a staircase and over a bridge except me, and then there were only 2 people that i could see and one was 
a man and he was drunk and he had brown stains on his coat and his shoes were not a pair and he was 
singing but i couldn't hear what he was singing, and the other was an indian man in a shop which was a 
little window in a wall. 
 
and i didn't want to talk to either of them because i was tired and hungry and i had already talked to lots 
of  strangers,  which  is  dangerous,  and  the  more  you  do  something  dangerous  the  more  likely  it  is  that 
something bad happens. but i didn't know how to get to 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng, so i had 
to ask somebody. 
 
so i went up to the man in the little shop and i said, "where is 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng?" 
 
and he picked up a little book and handed it to me and said, "two ninety-five." 
 
and the book was called london az street atlas and index, geographers' a-z map company, and i 
opened it up and it was lots of maps. 
 
and the man in the little shop said, "are you going to buy it or not?" 
 
and i said, "i don't know." 
 
and he said, "well, you can get your dirty fingers off it if you don't mind," and he took it back from me. 
 
and i said, "where is 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng?" 
 
and he said, "you can either buy the a-to-z or you can hop it. i'm not a walking encyclopedia." 
 
and i said, "is that the a-to-z?" and i pointed at the book. 
 
and he said, "no, it's a sodding crocodile." 
 
and i said, "is that the a-to-z?" because it wasn't a crocodile and i thought i had heard wrong because of 
his accent. 
 
and he said, "yes, it's the a-to-z." 
 
and i said, "can i buy it?" 
 
and he didn't say anything. 
 

and i said, "can i buy it?" 
 
and  he  said,  "two  pounds  ninety-five,  but  you're  giving  me  the  money  first.  i'm  not  having  you 
scarpering," and then i realized that he meant £2.95 when he said two ninety-five. 
 
and i paid him with my money and he gave me change just like in the shop at home and i went and sat 
down on the floor against the wall like the man with the dirty clothes but a long way away from him and i 
opened up the book. 
 
and inside the front cover there was a big map of london with places on it like abbey wood and poplar 
and  acton and  stanmore. and it said  key  to map  pages. and the  map was covered with a grid 
and each square of the grid had two numbers on it. and willesden was in the square which said 42 and 
43. and i worked out that the numbers were the numbers of the pages where you could see a bigger-scale 
map of that square of london. and the whole book was a big map of london, but it had been chopped up 
so it could be made into a book, and i liked that. 
 
but willesden junction wasn't on pages 42 and 43. and i found it on page 58, which was directly under 
page  42  on  the  key  to  map  pages  and  which  joined  up  with  page  42.  and  i  looked  round 
willesden junction in a spiral, like when i was looking for the train station in swindon, but on the map 
with my finger. 
 
and the man who had shoes that did not match stood in front of me and said, "big cheese. oh yes. the 
nurses. never. bloody liar. total bloody liar." 
 
then he went away. 
 
and it took me a long time to find chapter road because it wasn't on page 58. it was back on page 42, 
and it was in square 5c. 
 
and this was the shape of the roads between willesden junction and chapter road. 
 

 

 

and this was my route 

 

 

 
 
so i went up the staircase and over the bridge and i put my ticket in the little gray gate and went into the 
street and there was a bus and a big machine with a sign on it which said english welsh and scottish 
railways, but it was yellow, and i looked around and it was dark and there were lots of bright lights and i 
hadn't been outside for a long time and it made me feel sick. and i kept my eyelids very close together 
and i just looked at the shape of the roads and then i knew which roads were station approach and oak 
lane, which were the roads i had to go along. 
 
so  i  started  walking,  but  siobhan  said  i  didn't  have  to  describe  everything  that  happens,  i  just  have  to 
describe the things that were interesting. 
 
so i got to 451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng, and it took me 27 minutes and there was no one in 
when i pressed the button that said flat c and the only interesting thing that happened on the way was 8 
men dressed up in viking costumes with helmets with horns on and they were shouting, but they weren't 
real vikings because the vikings lived nearly 2,000 years ago, and also i had to go for another wee and i 
went in the alleyway down the side of a garage called burdett motors, which was closed, and i didn't like 
doing that but i didn't want to wet myself again, and there was nothing else interesting. 
 
so i decided to wait and i hoped that mother was not on holiday because that would mean she could be 
away  for  more  than  a  whole  week,  but  i  tried  not  to  think  about  this  because  i  couldn't  go  back  to 
swindon. 
 
so  i  sat  down  on  the  ground  behind  the  dustbins  in  the  little  garden  that  was  in  front  of  451c  chapter 
road,  london  nw2  5ng,  and  it  was  under  a  big  bush.  and  a  lady  came  into  the  garden  and  she  was 
carrying a little box with a metal grille on one end and a handle on the top like you use to take a cat to the 
vet, but i couldn't see if there was a cat in it, and she had shoes with high heels and she didn't see me. 
 
and then it started to rain and i got wet and i started shivering because i was cold. 
 
and then it was 11:32 p.m. and i heard voices of people walking along the street. 
 
and a voice said, "i don't care whether you thought it was funny or not," and it was a lady's voice. 
 
and another voice said, "judy, look. i'm sorry, ok," and it was a man's voice. 
 
and the other voice, which was the lady's voice, said, "well, perhaps you should have thought about that 
before you made me look like a complete idiot." 
 
and the lady's voice was mother's voice. 

 
and mother came into the garden and mr. shears was with her, and the other voice was his. 
 
so i stood up and i said, "you weren't in, so i waited for you." 
 
and mother said, "christopher." 
 
and mr. shears said, "what?" 
 
and mother put her arms around me and said, "christopher, christopher, christopher." 
 
and i pushed her away because she was grabbing me and i didn't like it, and i pushed really hard and i 
fell over. 
 
and mr. shears said, "what the hell is going on?" 
 
and mother said, "i'm so sorry, christopher. i forgot." 
 
and i was lying on the ground and mother held up her right hand and spread her fingers out in a fan so 
that i could touch her fingers, but then i saw that toby had escaped out of my pockets so i had to catch 
him. 
 
and mr. shears said, "i suppose this means ed's here." and there was a wall around the garden so toby 
couldn't get out because he was stuck in the corner and he couldn't climb up the walls fast enough and i 
grabbed him and put him back in my pocket and i said, "he's hungry. have you got any food i can give 
him, and some water?" 
 
and mother said, "where's your father, christopher?" 
 
and i said, "i think he's in swindon." 
 
and mr. shears said, "thank god for that." 
 
and mother said, "but how did you get here?" 
 
and my teeth were clicking against each other because of the cold and i couldn't stop them, and i said, "i 
came on the train. and it was really frightening. and i took father's cashpoint card so i could get money 
out and a policeman helped me. but then he wanted to take me back to father. and he was on the train 
with me. but then he wasn't." 
 
and mother said, "christopher, you're soaking. roger, don't just stand there." 
 
and then she said, "oh my god. christopher. i didn't. . . i didn't think i'd ever. . . why are you here on 
your own?" 
 
and mr. shears said, "are you going to come in or are you going to stay out here all night?" 
 
and  i  said,  "i'm  going  to  live  with  you  because  father  killed  wellington  with  a  garden  fork  and  i'm 
frightened of him." 
 
and mr. shears said, "jumping jack christ." 
 
and mother said, "roger, please. come on, christopher, let's go inside and get you dried off." 
 

so  i  stood  up  and  i  went  inside  the  house  and  mother  said,  "you  follow  roger,"  and  i  followed  mr. 
shears  up  the  stairs  and  there  was  a  landing  and  a  door  which  said  flat  c  and  i  was  scared  of  going 
inside because i didn't know what was inside. 
 
and  mother  said,  "go  on  or  you'll  catch  your  death,"  but  i  didn't  know  what  you'll  catch  your  death 
meant, and i went inside. 
 
and then she said, "i'll run you a bath," and i walked round the flat to make a map of it in my head so i 
felt safer, and the flat was like this 
 

 

 
and then mother made me take my clothes off and get into the bath and she said i could use her towel, 
which  was  purple  with  green  flowers  on  the  end.  and  she  gave  toby  a  saucer  of  water  and  some  bran 
flakes  and  i  let  him  run  around  the  bathroom.  and  he  did  three  little  poos  under  the  sink  and  i  picked 
them up and flushed them down the toilet and then i got back into the bath again because it was warm and 
nice. 
 
then mother came into the bathroom and she sat on the toilet and she said, "are you ok, christopher?" 
 
and i said, "i'm very tired." 
 
and she said, "i know, love." and then she said, "you're very brave." 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and she said, "you never wrote to me." 
 
and i said, "i know." 
 
and  she  said,  "why  didn't  you  write  to  me,  christopher?  i  wrote  you  all  those  letters.  i  kept  thinking 
something dreadful had happened, or you'd moved away and i'd never find out where you were." 
 
and i said, "father said you were dead." 
 
and she said, "what?" 
 
and i said, "he said you went into hospital because you had something wrong with your heart. and then 
you had a heart attack and died and he kept all the letters in a shirt box in the cupboard in his bedroom 
and i found them because i was looking for a book i was writing about wellington being killed and he'd 
taken it away from me and hidden it in the shirt box." 
 
and then mother said, "oh my god." 
 

and then she didn't say anything for a long while. and then she made a loud wailing noise like an animal 
on a nature program on television. 
 
and i didn't like her doing this because it was a loud noise, and i said, "why are you doing that?" 
 
and she didn't say anything for while, and then she said, "oh, christopher, i'm so sorry." 
 
and i said, "it's not your fault." 
 
and then she said, "bastard. the bastard." 
 
and  then,  after  a  while,  she  said,  "christopher,  let  me  hold  your  hand.  just  for  once.  just  for  me.  will 
you? i won't hold it hard," and she held out her hand. 
 
and i said, "i don't like people holding my hand." 
 
and she took her hand back and she said, "no. ok. that's ok." 
 
and then she said, "let's get you out of the bath and dried off, ok?" 
 
and i got out of the bath and dried myself with the purple towel. but i didn't have any pajamas so i put on 
a white t-shirt and a pair of yellow shorts which were mother's, but i didn't mind because i was so tired. 
and while i was doing this mother went into the kitchen and heated up some tomato soup because it was 
red. 
 
and then i heard someone opening the door of the flat and there was a strange man's voice outside, so i 
locked the bathroom door. and there was an argument outside and a man said, "i need to speak to him," 
and mother said, "he's been through enough today already," and the man said, "i know. but i still need to 
speak to him." 
 
and mother knocked on the door and said a policeman wanted to talk to me and i had to open the door. 
and she said she wouldn't let him take me away and she promised. so i picked toby up and opened the 
door. 
 
and there was a policeman outside the door and he said, "are you christopher boone?" 
 
and i said i was. 
 
and he said, "your father says you've run away. is that right?" 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and he said, "is this your mother?" and he pointed at mother. 
 
and i said, "yes." 
 
and he said, "why did you run away?" 
 
and i said, "because father killed wellington, who is a dog, and i was frightened of him." 
 
and he said, "so i've been told." and then he said, "do you want to go back to swindon to your father or 
do you want to stay here?" 
 
and i said, "i want to stay here." 

 
and he said, "and how do you feel about that?" 
 
and i said, "i want to stay here." 
 
and the policeman said, "hang on. i'm asking your mother." 
 
and mother said, "he told christopher i was dead." 
 
and the policeman said, "ok, let's. . . let's not get into an argument about who said what here. i just want 
to know whether --" 
 
and mother said, "of course he can stay." 
 
and then the policeman said, "well, i think that probably settles it as far as i'm concerned." 
 
and i said, "are you going to take me back to swindon?" 
 
and he said, "no." 
 
and then i was happy because i could live with mother. 
 
and the policeman said, "if your husband turns up and causes any trouble, just give us a ring. otherwise, 
you're going to have to sort this out between yourselves." 
 
and then the policeman went away and i had my tomato soup and mr. shears stacked up some boxes in 
the spare room so he could put a blowup mattress on the floor for me to sleep on, and i went to sleep. 
 
and then i woke up because there were people shouting in the flat and it was 2:31 a.m. and one of the 
people was father and i was frightened. but there wasn't a lock on the door of the spare room. 
 
and father shouted, "i'm talking to her whether you like it or not. and i am not going to be told what to 
do by you of all people." 
 
and mother shouted, "roger. don't. just --" 
 
and mr. shears shouted, "i'm not being spoken to like that in my own home." 
 
and father shouted, "i'll talk to you how i damn well like." 
 
and mother shouted, "you have no right to be here." 
 
and father shouted, "no right? no right? he's my fucking son, in case you've forgotten." 
 
and  mother  shouted,  "what  in  god's  name  did  you  think  you  were  playing  at,  saying  those  things  to 
him?" 
 
and father shouted, "what was i playing at? you were the one that bloody left." 
 
and mother shouted, "so you decided to just wipe me out of his life altogether?" 
 
and mr. shears shouted, "now let's us all just calm down here, shall we?" 
 
and father shouted, "well, isn't that what you wanted?" 

 
and mother shouted, "i wrote to him every week. every week." 
 
and father shouted, "wrote to him? what the fuck use is writing to him?" 
 
and mr. shears shouted, "whoa, whoa, whoa." 
 
and  father  shouted,  "i  cooked  his  meals.  i  cleaned  his  clothes.  i  looked  after  him  every  weekend.  i 
looked after him when he was ill. i took him to the doctor. i worried myself sick every time he wandered 
off somewhere at night. i went to school every time he got into a fight. and you? what? you wrote him 
some fucking letters." 
 
and mother shouted, "so you thought it was ok to tell him his mother was dead?" 
 
and mr. shears shouted, "now is not the time." 
 
and father shouted, "you, butt out or i'll --" 
 
and mother shouted, "ed, for god's sake --" 
 
and father said, "i'm going to see him. and if you try to stop me --" 
 
 
 
and then father came into my room. but i was holding my swiss army knife with the saw blade out in 
case he grabbed me. and mother came into the room as well, and she said, "it's ok, christopher. i won't 
let him do anything. you're all right." 
 
and father bent down on his knees near the bed and he said, "christopher?" 
 
but i didn't say anything. 
 
and he said, "christopher, i'm really, really sorry. about everything. about wellington. about the letters. 
about making you run away. i never meant. . . i promise i will never do anything like that again. hey. 
come on, kiddo." 
 
and then he held up his right hand and spread his fingers out in a fan so that i could touch his fingers, but 
i didn't because i was frightened. 
 
and father said, "shit. christopher, please." 
 
and there were tears dripping off his face. 
 
and no one said anything for a while. 
 
and then mother said, "i think you should go now," but she was talking to father, not me. 
 
and then the policeman came back because mr. shears had rung the police station and he told father to 
calm down and he took him out of the flat. 
 
and mother said, "you go back to sleep now. everything is going to be all right. i promise." 
 
and then i went back to sleep. 
 

229: 

and when i was asleep i had one of my favorite dreams. sometimes i have it during the day, but then it's 
a daydream. but i often have it at night as well. 
 
and in the dream nearly everyone on the earth is dead, because they have caught a virus. but it's not like 
a  normal  virus. it's like  a  computer  virus.  and people  catch  it  because  of  the  meaning of something  an 
infected person says and the meaning of what they do with their faces when they say it, which means that 
people can also get it from watching an infected person on television, which means that it spreads around 
the world really quickly. 
 
and when people get the virus they just sit on the sofa and do nothing and they don't eat or drink and so 
they die. but sometimes i have different versions of the dream, like when you can see two versions of a 
film, the ordinary one and the director's cut, like blade runner. and in some versions of the dream the 
virus makes them crash their cars or walk into the sea and drown, or jump into rivers, and i think that this 
version is better because then there aren't bodies of dead people everywhere. 
 
and eventually there is no one left in the world except people who don't look at other people's faces and 
who don't know what these pictures mean 
 

 

 

and these people are all special people like  me. and they like being on their own and i hardly ever see 
them because they are like okapi in the jungle in the congo, which are a kind of antelope and very shy 
and rare. 
 
and i can go anywhere in the world and i know that no one is going to talk to me or touch me or ask me a 
question. but if i don't want to go anywhere i don't have to, and i can stay at home and eat broccoli and 
oranges and licorice laces all the time, or i can play computer games for a whole week, or i can just sit in 
the corner of the room and rub a £1 coin back and forward over the ripple shapes on the surface of the 
radiator. and i wouldn't have to go to france. 
 
and i go out of father's house and i walk down the street, and it is very quiet even though it is the middle 
of the day and i can't hear any noise except birds singing and wind and sometimes buildings falling down 
in the distance, and if i stand very close to traffic lights i can hear a little click as the colors change. 
 
and i go into other people's houses and play at being a detective and i can break the windows to get in 
because the people are dead and it doesn't matter. and i go into shops and take things i want, like pink 
biscuits or pj's raspberry and mango smoothie or computer games or books or videos. 
 
and i take a ladder from father's van and i climb up onto the roof, and when i get to the edge of the roof i 
put  the  ladder  across  the  gap  and  i  climb  to  the  next  roof,  because  in  a  dream  you  are  allowed  to  do 
anything. 
 
and then i find someone's car keys and i get into their car and i drive, and it doesn't matter if i bump into 
things and i drive to the sea, and i park the car and i get out and there is rain pouring down. and i take an 
ice cream from a shop and eat it. and then i walk down to the beach. and the beach is covered in sand 

and big rocks and there is a lighthouse on a point but the light is not on because the lighthouse keeper is 
dead. 
 
and i stand in the surf and it comes up and over my shoes. and i don't go swimming in case there are 
sharks. and i stand and look at the horizon and i take out my long metal ruler and i hold it up against the 
line between the sea and the sky and i demonstrate that the line is a curve and the earth is round. and the 
way  the  surf  comes  up  and  over  my  shoes  and  then  goes  down  again  is  in  a  rhythm,  like  music  or 
drumming. 
 
and  then  i  get  some  dry  clothes  from  the  house  of  a  family  who  are  dead.  and  i  go  home  to  father's 
house, except it's not father's house anymore, it's mine. and i make myself some gobi aloo sag with red 
food coloring in it and some strawberry milk shake for a drink, and then i watch a video about the solar 
system and i play some computer games and i go to bed. 
 
and then the dream is finished and i am happy. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

233: 

 
the next morning i had fried tomatoes for breakfast and a tin of green beans which mother heated up in a 
saucepan. 
 
in the middle of breakfast, mr. shears said, "ok. he can stay for a few days." 
 
and mother said, "he can stay as long as he needs to stay." 
 
and mr. shears said, "this flat is hardly big enough for two people, let alone three." 
 
and mother said, "he can understand what you're saying, you know." 
 
and mr. shears said, "what's he going to do? there's no school for him to go to. we've both got jobs. it's 
bloody ridiculous." 
 
and mother said, "roger. that's enough." 
 
then she made me some red zinger herbal tea with sugar in it but i didn't like it, and she said, "you can 
stay for as long as you want to stay." 
 
and after mr. shears had gone  to work she made  a telephone call  to the office  and took what  is called 
compassionate leave, which is when someone in your family dies or is ill. 
 
then she said we had to go and buy some clothes for me to wear and some pajamas and a toothbrush and 
a flannel. so we went out of the flat and we walked to the main road, which was hill lane, which was the 
a4088,  and  it  was  really  crowded  and  we  caught  a  number  266  bus  to  brent  cross  shopping  centre. 
except there were too many people in john lewis and i was frightened and i lay down on the floor next 
to the wristwatches and i screamed and mother had to take me home in a taxi. 
 
then  she  had  to  go  back  to  the  shopping  center  to  buy  me  some  clothes  and  some  pajamas  and  a 
toothbrush and a flannel, so i stayed in the spare room while she was gone because i didn't want to be in 
the same room as mr. shears because i was frightened of him. 
 
and  when mother  got  home  she  brought  me  a  glass  of  strawberry  milk  shake  and  showed  me  my  new 
pajamas, and the pattern on them was 5-pointed blue stars on a purple background like this 
 

 
and i said, "i have to go back to swindon." 
 
and mother said, "christopher, you've only just got here." 
 

 

and i said, "i have to go back because i have to sit my maths a level." 
 
and mother said, "you're doing maths a level?" 
 
and i said, "yes. i'm taking it on wednesday and thursday and friday next week." 
 
and mother said, "god." 
 
and i said, "the reverend peters is going to be the invigilator." 
 
and mother said, "i mean, that's really good." 
 
and i said, "i'm going to get an a grade. and that's why i have to go back to swindon. except i don't 
want to see father. so i have to go to swindon with you." 
 
then mother put her hands over her face and breathed out hard, and she said, "i don't know whether that's 
going to be possible." 
 
and i said, "but i have to go." 
 
and mother said, "let's talk about this some other time, ok?" 
 
and i said, "ok. but i have to go to swindon." 
 
and she said, "christopher, please." 
 
and i drank some of my milk shake. 
 
and later on, at 10:51 p.m. i went out onto the balcony to find out whether i could see any stars, but there 
weren't  any  because  of  all  the  clouds  and  what  is  called  light  pollution,  which  is  light  from  streetlights 
and  car  headlights  and  floodlights  and  lights  in  buildings  reflecting  off  tiny  particles  in  the  atmosphere 
and getting in the way of light from the stars. so i went back inside. 
 
but i couldn't sleep. and i got out of bed at 2:07 a.m. and i felt scared of mr. shears so i went downstairs 
and out of the front door into chapter road. and there was no one in the street and it was quieter than it 
was  during  the  day,  even  though  you  could  hear  traffic  in  the  distance  and  sirens,  so  it  made  me  feel 
calmer.  and  i  walked  down  chapter  road  and  looked  at  all  the  cars  and  the  patterns  the  phone  wires 
made against the orange clouds and the things that people had in their front gardens, like a gnome and a 
cooker and a tiny pond and a teddy bear. 
 
then i heard two people coming along the road, so i crouched down between the end of a skip and a ford 
transit  van,  and  they  were  talking  in  a  language  that  wasn't  english,  but  they  didn't  see  me.  and  there 
were two tiny brass cogs in the dirty water in the gutter by my feet, like cogs from a windup watch. 
 
and i liked it between the skip and the ford transit van so i stayed there for a long time. and i looked 
out  at the street. and  the only colors you could see were orange  and black  and  mixtures of orange  and 
black. and you couldn't tell what colors the cars would be during the day. 
 
and i wondered whether you could tessellate crosses, and i worked out that you could by imagining this 
picture in my head 
 

 

 
and then i heard mother's voice and she was shouting, "christopher. . . ? christopher. . . ?" and she was 
running down the road, so i came out from between the skip and the ford transit van and she ran up to 
me and said, "jesus christ," and she stood in front of me and pointed her finger at my face and said, "if 
you ever do that again, i swear to god, christopher, i love you, but. . . i don't know what i'll do." 
 
so she made  me promise never to leave the flat on  my own because it was dangerous and because you 
couldn't trust people in london because they were strangers. and the next day she had to go to the shops 
again and she made me promise not to answer the door if anyone rang the bell. and when she came back 
she brought some food pellets for toby and three star trek videos and i watched them in the living room 
until mr. shears came home and then i went into the spare room again. and i wished that 451c chapter 
road, london nw2 5ng, had a garden but it didn't. 
 
and the day after that the office where mother worked rang and told her she couldn't come back to work 
because they had got someone else to do her job for her, and she was really angry and she said that it was 
illegal and she was going to complain, but mr. shears said, "don't be a bloody fool. it was a temporary 
job, for christ's sake." 
 
and when mother came into the spare room before i went to sleep i said, "i have to go to swindon to take 
my a level." 
 
and she said, "christopher, not now. i'm getting phone calls from your father threatening to take me to 
court. i'm getting it in the neck from roger. it's not a good time." 
 
and i said, "but i have to go because it's been arranged and the reverend peters is going to invigilate." 
 
and she said, "look. it's only an exam. i can ring the school. we can get it postponed. you can take it 
some other time." 
 
and  i  said,  "i  can't  take  it  another  time.  it's  been  arranged.  and  i've  done  lots  of  revision.  and  mrs. 
gascoyne said we could use a room at school." 
 
and mother said, "christopher, i am just about holding this together. but i am this close to losing it, all 
right? so just give me some --" 
 
then she stopped talking and she put her hand over her mouth and she stood up and went out of the room. 
and i started feeling a pain in my chest like i did on the underground because i thought i wasn't going to 
be able to go back to swindon and take my a level. 
 
and the next morning i looked out of the window in the dining room to count the cars in the street to see 
whether it was going to be a quite good day or a good day or a super good day or a black day, but 
it  wasn't  like  being  on  the  bus  to  school  because  you  could  look  out  of  the  window  for  as  long  as  you 
wanted and see as many cars as you wanted, and i looked out of the window for three hours and i saw 5 
red cars in a row and 4 yellow cars in a row, which meant it was both a good day and a black day, so 

the system didn't work anymore. but if i concentrated on counting the cars it stopped me from thinking 
about my a level and the pain in my chest. 
 
and in the afternoon mother took me to hampstead heath in a taxi and we sat on the top of a hill and 
looked at the planes coming into heathrow airport in the distance. and i had a red ice lolly from an ice 
cream van. and mother said she had rung mrs. gascoyne and told her that i was going to take my maths 
a level next year, so i threw  my red ice  lolly away and i screamed for a  long time and  the pain in  my 
chest hurt so much that it was hard to breathe and a man came up and asked if i was ok and mother said, 
"well, what does it look like to you?" and he went away. 
 
and  then  i  was  tired  from  screaming  and  mother  took  me  back  to  the  flat  in  another  taxi  and  the  next 
morning was saturday and she told mr. shears to go out and get me some books about science and maths 
from the library, and they were called 100 number puzzles and the origins of the universe and nuclear 
power, but they were for children and they were not very good so i didn't read them, and mr. shears said, 
"well, it's nice to know my contribution is appreciated." 
 
and i hadn't eaten anything since i threw away the red ice lolly on hampstead heath, so mother made me 
a  chart  with  stars  on  it  like  when  i  was  very  small  and  she  filled  a  measuring  jug  with  complan  and 
strawberry flavoring and i got a bronze star for drinking 200 ml and a silver star for drinking 400 ml and a 
gold star for drinking 600 ml. 
 
and when mother and mr. shears argued i took the little radio from the kitchen and i went and sat in the 
spare  room  and  i  tuned  it  halfway  between  two  stations  so  that  all  i  could  hear  was  white  noise  and  i 
turned the volume up really loud and i held it against my ear and the sound filled my head and it hurt so 
that i couldn't feel any other sort of hurt, like the hurt in my chest, and i couldn't hear mother and mr. 
shears arguing and i couldn't think about not doing my a level or the fact that there wasn't a garden at 
451c chapter road, london nw2 5ng, or the fact that i couldn't see the stars. 
 
and then it was monday. and it was very late at night and mr. shears came into my room and woke me 
up and he had been drinking beer because he smelled like father did when he had been drinking beer with 
rhodri.  and  he  said,  "you  think  you're  so  fucking  clever,  don't  you.  don't  you  ever,  ever  think  about 
other people for one second, eh? well, i bet you're really pleased with yourself now, aren't you." 
 
and  then  mother  came  in  and  pulled  him  out of the  room  and  said,  "christopher,  i'm  sorry. i'm  really, 
really sorry." 
 
the  next  morning,  after  mr.  shears  had  gone  to  work,  mother  packed  lots  of  her  clothes  into  two 
suitcases and told me to come downstairs and bring toby and get into the car. and she put the suitcases 
into the boot and we drove off. but it was mr. shears's car and i said, "are you stealing the car?" 
 
and she said, "i'm just borrowing it." 
 
and i said, "where are we going?" 
 
and she said, "we're going home." 
 
and i said, "do you mean home in swindon?" 
 
and she said, "yes." 
 
and i said, "is father going to be there?" 
 
and she said, "please, christopher. don't give me any hassle right now, ok?" 
 

and i said, "i don't want to be with father." 
 
and she said, "just. . . just. . . it's going to be all right, christopher, ok? it's going to be all right." 
 
and i said, "are we going back to swindon so i can do my maths a level?" 
 
and mother said, "what?" 
 
and i said, "i'm meant to be doing my maths a level tomorrow." 
 
and  mother  spoke  very  slowly  and  she  said,  "we  are  going  back  to  swindon  because  if  we  stay  in 
london any longer. . . someone was going to get hurt. and i don't necessarily mean you." 
 
and i said, "what do you mean?" 
 
and she said, "now i need you to be quiet for a while." 
 
and i said, "how long do you want me to be quiet for?" 
 
and she said, "jesus." and then she said, "half an hour, christopher. i need you to be quiet for half an 
hour." 
 
and we drove all the way to swindon and it took 3 hours 12 minutes and we had to stop for petrol and 
mother  bought  me  a  milkybar  but  i  didn't  eat  it.  and  we  got  caught  in  a  long  traffic  jam  which  was 
caused by people slowing down to look at an accident on the other carriageway. and i tried to work out a 
formula to determine whether a traffic jam would be caused just by people slowing down and how this 
was influenced by (a) the density of traffic, and (b) the speed of the traffic, and (c) how quickly drivers 
braked when they saw the brake of the lights of the car in front coming on. but i was too tired because i 
hadn't slept the night before because i was thinking about not being able to do my maths a level. so i fell 
asleep. 
 
and when we got to swindon mother had keys to the house and we went in and she said, "hello?" but 
there was no one there because it was 1:23 p.m. and i was frightened but mother said i would be safe, so 
i went up to my room and closed the door. i took toby out of my pocket and i let him run around and i 
played minesweeper and i did the expert version in 174 seconds, which was 75 seconds longer than my 
best time. 
 
and then it was 6:35 p.m. and i heard father come home in his van and i moved the bed up against the 
door so he couldn't get in and he came into the house and he and mother shouted at each other. 
 
and father shouted, "how the fuck did you get in here?" and mother shouted, "this is my house, too, in 
case you've forgotten." 
 
and father shouted, "is your fucking fancy man here as well?" 
 
and then i picked up the bongo drums that uncle terry had bought me and i knelt down in the corner of 
the room and i pressed my head into the join between the two walls and i banged the drums and i groaned 
and  i  carried  on  doing  this  for  an  hour  and  then  mother  came  into  the  room  and  said  father  had  gone. 
and she said father had gone to stay with rhodri for a while and we would get a place to live of our own 
in the next few weeks. 
 
then i went into the garden and i found toby's cage behind the shed and i brought it inside and i cleaned 
it and put toby back in it. 
 

and i asked mother if i could do my maths a level the next day. 
 
and she said, "i'm sorry, christopher." 
 
and i said, "can i do my maths a level?" 
 
and she said, "you're not listening to me, are you, christopher." 
 
and i said, "i'm listening to you." 
 
and mother said, "i told you. i rang your headmistress. i told her you were in london. i told her you'd do 
it next year." 
 
and i said, "but i'm here now and i can take it." 
 
and  mother  said,  "i'm  sorry,  christopher.  i  was  trying  to  do  things  properly.  i  was  trying  not  to  mess 
things up." 
 
and my chest began hurting again and i folded my arms and i rocked backward and forward and groaned. 
 
and mother said, "i didn't know we'd be coming back." 
 
but i carried on groaning and rocking backward and forward. 
 
and mother said, "come on. this isn't going to solve anything." 
 
then she asked if i wanted to watch one of my blue planet videos, about life under the arctic ice or the 
migration of humpback whales, but i didn't say anything because i knew i wasn't going to be able to do 
my maths a level and it was like pressing your thumbnail against a radiator when it's really hot and the 
pain starts and it makes you want to cry and the pain keeps hurting even when you take your thumb away 
from the radiator. 
 
then mother made me some carrots and broccoli and ketchup, but i didn't eat them. 
 
and i didn't sleep that night either. 
 
the next day mother drove me to school in mr. shears's car because we missed the bus. and when we 
were  getting  into  the  car,  mrs.  shears  came  across  the  road  and  said  to  mother,  "you've  got  a  fucking 
nerve." 
 
and mother said, "get into the car, christopher." 
 
but i couldn't get into the car because the door was locked. 
 
and mrs. shears said, "so, has he finally dumped you, too?" 
 
then mother opened her door and got into the car and unlocked my door and i got in and we drove away. 
 
and  when we  got  to  school  siobhan  said,  "so  you're  christopher's  mother."  and siobhan  said  that  she 
was glad to see me again and she asked if i was ok and i said i was tired. and mother explained that i 
was upset because i couldn't do my maths a level so i hadn't been eating properly or sleeping properly. 
 
and then, mother went away and i drew a picture of a bus using perspective so that i didn't think about 
the pain in my chest and it looked like this 

 

 

 
and after lunch siobhan said that she had spoken to mrs. gascoyne and she still had my a-level papers in 
3 sealed envelopes in her desk. 
 
so i asked if i could still do my a level. and siobhan said, "i think so. we're going to ring the reverend 
peters  this  afternoon  to  make  sure  he  can  still  come  in  and  be  your  invigilator.  and  mrs.  gascoyne  is 
going to write a letter to the examination board to say that you're going to take the exam after all. and 
hopefully they'll say that that's ok. but we can't know that for sure." then she stopped talking for a few 
seconds. "i thought i should tell you now. so you could think about it." 
 
and i said, "so i could think about what?" 
 
and she said, "is this what you want to do, christopher?" and i thought about the question and i wasn't 
sure what the answer was because i wanted to do my maths a level but i was very tired and when i tried 
to think about maths my brain didn't work properly and when i tried to remember certain facts, like the 
logarithmic  formula  for  the  approximate  number  of  prime  numbers  not  greater  than  x,  i  couldn't 
remember them and this made me frightened. 
 
and siobhan said, "you don't have to do it, christopher. if you say you don't want to do it no one is going 
to be angry with you. and it won't be wrong or illegal or stupid. it will just be what you want and that 
will be fine," 
 
and i said, "i want to do it," because i don't like it when i put things in my timetable and i have to take 
them out again, because when i do that it makes me feel sick. 
 
and siobhan said, "ok." 
 
and she rang the reverend peters and he came into school at 3:27 p.m. and he said, "so, young man, are 
we ready to roll?" 
 
and  i  did  paper  1  of  my  maths  a  level  sitting  in  the  art  room.  and  the  reverend  peters  was  the 
invigilator and he sat at a desk while i did the exam and he read a book called the cost of discipleship 
by  dietrich  bonhoeffer  and  ate  a  sandwich.  and  in  the  middle  of  the  exam  he  went  and  smoked  a 
cigarette outside the window, but he watched me through the window in case i cheated. 
 
and when i opened the paper and read through it i couldn't think how to answer any of the questions and 
also i couldn't breathe properly. and i wanted to hit somebody or stab them with my swiss army knife, 
but there wasn't anyone to hit or stab with my swiss army knife except the reverend peters and he was 
very tall and if i hit him or stabbed him with my swiss army knife he wouldn't be my invigilator for the 
rest  of  the  exam.  so  i  took  deep  breaths  like  siobhan  said  i  should  do  when  i  want  to  hit  someone  in 
school and i counted 50 breaths and did cubes of the cardinal numbers as i counted, like this 

1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 216, 343, 512, 729, 1000, 1331, 1728, 2197, 2744, 3375, 4096, 4913. . . etc. 

and that made me feel a little calmer. but the exam was 2 hours long and 20 minutes had already gone so 
i had to work really fast and i didn't have time to check my answers properly. 
 
and that night, just after i got home, father came back to the house and i screamed but mother said she 
wouldn't let anything bad happen to me and i went into the garden and lay down and looked at the stars in 
the sky and made myself negligible. and when father came out of the house he looked at me for a long 
time and then he punched the fence and made a hole in it and went away. 
 
and i slept a little bit that night because i was doing my maths a level. and i had some spinach soup for 
supper. 
 
and  the  next  day  i  did  paper  2  and  the  reverend  peters  read  the  cost  of  discipleship  by  dietrich 
bonhoeffer, but this time he didn't smoke a cigarette and siobhan made me go into the toilets before the 
exam and sit on my own and do breathing and counting. 
 
and i was playing the 11th hour on my computer that evening when a taxi stopped outside the house. 
mr. shears was in the taxi and he got out of the taxi and threw a big cardboard box of things belonging to 
mother onto the lawn. and they were a hair dryer and some knickers and some l'oréal shampoo and a 
box of muesli and two books, diana: her true story by andrew morton and rivals by jilly cooper, 
and a photograph of me in a silver frame. and the glass in the photograph frame broke when it fell onto 
the grass. 
 
then he got some keys out of his pocket and got into his car and drove away and mother ran out of the 
house and she ran into the street and shouted, "don't fucking bother coming back, either!" and she threw 
the box of muesli and it hit the boot of his car as he drove away and mrs. shears was looking out of her 
window when mother did this. 
 
the next day i did paper 3 and the reverend peters read the daily mail and smoked three cigarettes. 
 
and this was my favorite question 

prove the following result: 
 
a triangle with sides that can be written in the form n2 + 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 1) is right-angled. 
 
show, by means of a counterexample, that the converse is false. 

and i was going to write out how i answered the question except siobhan said it wasn't very interesting, 
but i said it was. and she said people wouldn't want to read the answers to a maths question in a book, 
and she said i could put the answer in an appendix, which is an extra chapter at the end of a book which 
people can read if they want to. and that is what i have done. 
 
and then my chest didn't hurt so much and it was easier to breathe. but i still felt sick because i didn't 
know if i'd done well in the exam and because i didn't know if the examination board would allow  my 
exam paper to be considered after mrs. gascoyne had told them i wasn't going to take it. 
 
and  it's  best  if  you  know  a  good  thing  is  going  to  happen,  like  an  eclipse  or  getting  a  microscope  for 
christmas.  and  it's  bad  if  you  know  a  bad  thing  is  going  to  happen,  like  having  a  filling  or  going  to 
france. but i think it is worst if you don't know whether it is a good thing or a bad thing which is going to 
happen. 
 

and  father  came  round  to  the  house  that  night  and  i  was  sitting  on  the  sofa  watching  university 
challenge and just answering the science questions. and he stood in the doorway of the living room and 
he said, "don't scream, ok, christopher. i'm not going to hurt you." 
 
and mother was standing behind him so i didn't scream. 
 
then he came a bit closer to me and he crouched down like you do with dogs to show that you are not an 
aggressor and he said, "i wanted to ask you how the exam went." 
 
but i didn't say anything. 
 
and mother said, "tell him, christopher." 
 
but i still didn't say anything. 
 
and mother said, "please, christopher." 
 
so i said, "i don't know if i got all the questions right because i was really tired and i hadn't eaten any 
food so i couldn't think properly." 
 
and then father nodded and he didn't say anything for a short while. then he said "thank you." 
 
and i said, "what for?" 
 
and he said, "just. . . thank you." then he said, "i'm very proud of you, christopher. very proud. i'm sure 
you did really well." 
 
and then he went away and i watched the rest of university challenge. 
 
and  the  next  week  father  told  mother  she  had  to  move  out  of  the  house,  but  she  couldn't  because  she 
didn't have any money to pay rent for a flat. and i asked if father would be arrested and go to prison for 
killing  wellington  because  we  could  live  in  the  house  if  he  was  in  prison.  but  mother  said  the  police 
would  only  arrest  father  if  mrs.  shears  did  what  is  called  pressing  charges,  which  is  telling  the  police 
you want them to arrest someone for a crime, because the police don't arrest people for little crimes unless 
you ask them and mother said that killing a dog was only a little crime. 
 
but then everything was ok because mother got a job on the till in a garden center and the doctor gave 
her pills to take every morning to stop her from feeling sad, except that sometimes they made her dizzy 
and she fell over if she stood up too fast. so we moved into a room in a big house that was made of red 
bricks. and the bed was in the same room as the kitchen and i didn't like it because it was small and the 
corridor was painted brown and there was a toilet and a bathroom that other people used and mother had 
to clean it before i used it or i wouldn't use it and sometimes i wet myself because other people were in 
the bathroom. and the corridor outside the room smelled like gravy and the bleach they use to clean the 
toilets at school. and inside the room it smelled like socks and pine air freshener. 
 
and i didn't like waiting to find out about my maths a level. and whenever i thought about the future i 
couldn't see  anything  clearly  in  my  head  and  that  made  a  panic start.  so  siobhan  said  i  shouldn't  think 
about  the  future.  she  said,  "just  think  about  today.  think  about  things  that  have  happened.  especially 
about good things that have happened." 
 
and one of the good things was that mother bought me a wooden puzzle which looked like this 
 

 

 
 
and you had to detach the top part of the puzzle from the bottom part, and it was really difficult. 
 
and another good thing was that i helped mother paint her room white with a hint of wheat, except i 
got paint in my hair and she wanted to wash it out by rubbing shampoo on my head when i was in the 
bath, but i wouldn't let her, so there was paint in my hair for 5 days and then i cut it out with a pair of 
scissors. 
 
but there were more bad things than good things. 
 
and one of them was that mother didn't get back from work till 5:30 p.m. so i had to go to father's house 
between 3:49 p.m. and 5:30 p.m., because i wasn't allowed to be on my own and mother said i didn't have 
a choice, so i pushed the bed against the door in case father tried to come in. and sometimes he tried to 
talk  to  me  through  the  door,  but  i  didn't  answer  him.  and  sometimes  i  heard  him  sitting  on  the  floor 
outside the door quietly for a long time. 
 
and another bad thing was that toby died because he was 2 years and 7 months old, which is very old for 
a rat, and i said i wanted to bury him, but mother didn't have a garden, so i buried him in a big plastic pot 
of earth like a pot you put a plant in. and i said i wanted another rat but mother said i couldn't have one 
because the room was too small. 
 
and i solved the puzzle because i worked out that there were two bolts inside the puzzle and they were 
tunnels with metal rods in them like this 
 

 

 
and you had to hold the puzzle so that both rods slid to the end of their tunnels and they weren't crossing 
the intersection between the two pieces of the puzzle and then you could pull them apart. 
 
and  mother  picked  me  up  from  father's  house  one  day  after  she  had  finished  work  and  father  said, 
"christopher, can i have a talk with you?" 
 
and i said, "no." 
 
and mother said, "it's ok. i'll be here." 
 

and i said, "i don't want to talk to father." 
 
and father said, "i'll do you a deal." and he was holding the kitchen timer, which is a big plastic tomato 
sliced through the middle, and he twisted it and it started ticking. and he said, "five minutes, ok? that's 
all. then you can go." 
 
so  i  sat  on  the  sofa  and  he  sat  on  the  armchair  and  mother  was  in  the  hallway  and  father  said, 
"christopher, look. . . things can't go on like this. i don't know about you, but this. . . this just hurts too 
much. you being in the house but refusing to talk to me. . . you have to learn to trust me. . . and i don't 
care how long it takes. . . if it's a minute one day and two minutes the next and three minutes the next and 
it takes years i don't care. because this is important. this is more important than anything else." 
 
and then he tore a little strip of skin away from the side of the thumbnail on his left hand. 
 
and  then  he  said,  "let's call  it.  .  .  let's  call  it  a  project.  a  project  we  have  to  do  together.  you  have  to 
spend more time with me. and i. . . i have to show you that you can trust me. and it will be difficult at 
first because. . . because it's a difficult project. but it will get better. i promise." 
 
then he rubbed the sides of his forehead with his fingertips, and he said, "you don't have to say anything, 
not  right  now.  you  just  have  to  think  about  it.  and,  um.  .  .  i've  got  you  a  present.  to  show  you  that  i 
really mean what i say. and to say sorry. and because. . . well, you'll see what i mean." 
 
then he got out of the armchair and he walked over to the kitchen door and opened it and there was a big 
cardboard box on the floor and there was a blanket in it and he bent down and put his hands inside the 
box and he took a little sandy-colored dog out. 
 
then he came back through and gave me the dog. and he said, "he's two months old. and he's a golden 
retriever." 
 
and the dog sat in my lap and i stroked it. 
 
and no one said anything for a while. 
 
then father said, "christopher, i would never, ever do anything to hurt you." 
 
then no one said anything. 
 
then mother came into the room and said, "you won't be able to take him away with you, i'm afraid. the 
bed-sit's too small. but your father's going to look after him here. and you can come and take him out for 
walks whenever you want." 
 
and i said, "does he have a name?" 
 
and father said, "no. you can decide what to call him." 
 
and the dog chewed my finger. 
 
and then it was 5 minutes and the tomato alarm went. so mother and i drove back to her room. 
 
and the next week there was a lightning storm and the lightning hit a big tree in the park near father's 
house and knocked it down and men came and cut the branches up with chain saws and carried the logs 
away on a lorry, and all that was left was a big black pointed stump made of carbonized wood. 
 

and i got the results of my maths a level and i got an a grade, which is the best result, and it made me 
feel like this 
 

 

 
 
and i called the dog sandy. and father bought him a collar and a lead and i was allowed to take him for 
walks to the shop and back. and i played with him with a rubber bone. 
 
and  mother  got  flu  and  i  had  to  spend  three  days  with  father  and  stay  in  his  house.  but  it  was  ok 
because  sandy  slept  on  my  bed  so  he  would  bark  if  anyone  came  into  the  room  during  the  night.  and 
father  made  a  vegetable  patch  in  the  garden  and  i  helped  him.  and  we  planted  carrots  and  peas  and 
spinach and i'm going to pick them and eat them when they're ready. 
 
and i went to a bookshop with mother and i bought a book called further maths for a level and father 
told mrs. gascoyne that i was going to take a-level further maths next year and she said "ok." 
 
and i am going to pass it and get an a grade. and in two years' time i am going to take a-level physics 
and get an a grade. 
 
and then, when i've done that, i am going to go to university in another town. and it doesn't have to be in 
london because i don't like london and there are universities in lots of places and not all of them are in 
big cities. and i can live in a flat with a garden and a proper toilet. and i can take sandy and my books 
and my computer. 
 
and then i will get a first class honors degree and i will become a scientist. 
 
and i know i can do this because i went to london on my own, and because i solved the mystery of who 
killed wellington? and i found my mother and i was brave and i wrote a book and that means i can do 
anything. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

appendix 

question 

prove the following result: 
 
a triangle with sides that can be written in the form n2 + 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 1) is right-angled. 
 
show, by means of a counterexample, that the converse is false. 

answer 
 
first we must determine which is the longest side of a triangle with sides that can be written in the form 
n2 + 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 1)  

n2 + 1 - 2n = (n - 1)2 
and if n > 1 then (n - 1)2 > 0 
therefore n2 + 1 - 2n > 0 
therefore n2 + 1 > 2n 
similarly (n2 + 1) - (n2 - 1) = 2 
therefore n2 + 1 > n2 - 1 

this means that n2 + 1 is the longest side of a triangle with sides that can be written in the form n2 + 1, n2 
- 1 and 2n (where n > 1). 
 
this can also be shown by means of the following graph (but this doesn't prove anything): 
 

 
according to pythagoras's theorem, if the sum of the squares of the two shorter sides equals the square of 
the hypotenuse, then the triangle is right-angled. therefore to prove that the triangle is right-angled we 
need to show that this is the case. 
 
the sum of the squares of the shorter two sides is (n2 - 1)2 + (2n)2 

 

(n2 - 1)2 + (2n)2 = n4 - 2n2 + 1 + 4n2 = n4 + 2n2 + 1 

the square of the hypotenuse is (n2 + 1)2 

(n2 + 1)2 = n4 + 2n2 + 1 

therefore the sum of the squares of the shorter two sides is equal to the square of the hypotenuse and the 
triangle is right-angled. 
 
and the converse of "a triangle with sides that can be written in the form n2 + 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 
1) is right-angled" is "a triangle that is right-angled has sides whose lengths can be written in the form n2 
+ 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 1)." 
 
and a counterexample means finding a triangle which is right-angled but whose sides cannot be written 
in the form n2 + 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 1). 

so let the hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle abc be ab. 

 

and let ab = 65 
and let bc = 60 
then ca = (cid:14) (ab2 - bc2) 
= (cid:14) (652 - 602) = (cid:14) (4225 - 3600) = (cid:14) 625 = 25 
let ab = n2 + 1 = 65 
then n = (cid:14) (65 - 1) = (cid:14) 64 = 8 
therefore (n2 - 1) = 64 - 1 = 63 (cid:2) bc = 60 (cid:2) ca = 25  
and 2n = 16 (cid:2) bc = 60 (cid:2) ca = 25 

therefore the triangle abc is right-angled but it does not have sides which can be written in the form n2 
+ 1, n2 - 1 and 2n (where n > 1). qed 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

footnotes 

 
 
1 i found this in a book when mother took me into the library in town in 1996.  

return to story  
 

 
2 this is not a metaphor, it is a simile, which means that it really did look like there were two very small 
mice  hiding  in his nostrils,  and  if  you  make  a  picture  in  your  head  of  a  man  with  two  very  small  mice 
hiding in his nostrils, you will know what the police inspector looked like. and a simile is not a lie, unless 
it is a bad simile.  

return to story       
 

 
3 but i wouldn't have shreddies and tea because they are both brown.  

return to story  

 
 
4 once i didn't talk to anyone for 5 weeks.  

return to story  

 
5 when i was 6 mother used to get me to drink strawberry-flavored slimming meals out of a measuring 
jug and we would have competitions to see how fast i could drink a quarter of a liter.  

return to story  

 
 
6 people say that you always have to tell the truth. but they do not mean this because you are not allowed 
to tell old people that they are old and you are not allowed to tell people if they smell funny or if a grown-
up has made a fart. and you are not allowed to say "i don't like you" unless that person has been horrible 
to you.  

return to story  

 
 
7 stupid things are things like emptying a jar of peanut butter onto the table in the kitchen and making it 
level  with  a  knife  so  it  covers  all  the  table  right  to  the  edges,  or  burning  things  on  the  gas  stove  to  see 
what happened to them, like my shoes or silver foil or sugar.  

return to story  
 

 
8 i only did this once by borrowing the keys when she went into town on the bus, and i hadn't driven a car 

before  and  i  was  8  years  old  and  5  months  so  i  drove  it  into  the  wall,  and  the  car  isn't  there  anymore 
because mother is dead.  

return to story  
 

 
9 it is permitted to move the chairs and the table in the kitchen because that is different, but it makes me 
feel dizzy and sick if someone has moved the sofa and the chairs around in the living room or the dining 
room.  mother  used  to  do  this  when  she  did  the  hoovering,  so  i  made  a  special  plan  of  where  all  the 
furniture was meant to be and did measurements and i put everything back in its proper place afterward 
and then i felt better. but since mother died father hasn't done any hoovering, so that is ok. and mrs. 
shears did the hoovering once but i did groaning and she shouted at father and she never did it again.  

return to story  

 
 
10 the dhole is the indian wild dog and it looks like a fox.  

return to story  

 
 
11 the langur is the entellus monkey.  

return to story  

 
 
12 this is really true because i asked siobhan what people thought about when they looked at things, and 
this is what she said.  

return to story  

 
 
13  in  the  art  class  we  do  art,  but  in  the  first  morning  class  and  the  first  afternoon  class  and  the  second 
afternoon class we do lots of different things like reading and tests and social skills and looking after 
animals  and  what  we  did  at  the  weekend  and  writing  and  maths  and  stranger  danger  and  money 
and personal hygiene. 

 return to story  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:3)(cid:7)

christopher john francis boone knows all the countries of the world and their capitals and every prime 
number up to 7,057. he relates well to animals but has no understanding of human emotions. he cannot 
stand  to  be  touched.  although  gifted  with  a  superbly  logical  brain,  christopher  is  autistic.  everyday 
interactions  and  admonishments  have  little  meaning  for  him.  routine,  order,  and  predictability  shelter 
him  from  the  messy  wider  world.  then,  at  fifteen,  christopher's  carefully  constructed  world  falls  apart 
when he finds his neighbor's dog, wellington, impaled on a garden fork, and he is initially blamed for the 
killing. 
 
christopher decides that he will track down the real killer and turns to his favorite fictional character, the 
impeccably  logical  sherlock  holmes,  for  inspiration.  but  the  investigation  leads  him  down  some 
unexpected paths and ultimately brings him face to face with the dissolution of his parents' marriage. as 
he  tries  to  deal  with  the  crisis  within  his  own  family,  we  are  drawn  into  the  workings  of  christopher's 
mind. 
 
and  herein  lies  the  key  to  the  brilliance  of  mark  haddon's  choice  of  narrator:  the  most  wrenching  of 
emotional moments are chronicled by a boy who cannot fathom emotion. the effect is dazzling, making 
for  a  novel  that  is  deeply  funny,  poignant,  and  fascinating  in  its  portrayal  of  a  person  whose  curse  and 
blessing are a mind that perceives the world literally. 
 
the  curious  incident  of  the  dog  in  the  night-time  is  one  of  the  freshest  debuts  in  years:  a  comedy,  a 
heartbreaker, a mystery story, a novel of exceptional literary merit that is great fun to read. 
 
 
 
mark haddon is a writer and illustrator of numerous award-winning children's books and television 
screenplays. as a young  man, haddon worked with autistic individuals. he teaches creative writing for 
the arvon foundation and at oxford university. he lives in oxford, england. 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

scan notes, v3.0 

proofed  carefully  against  dt;  italics,  images  and  special  characters  intact.  this  document  is 
abebook.css  and  nicebook.css  compatible.  could  not  comply  to  hhh  standards  and  still  produce  a 
dependable copy, but adhered to as many of its requirements as i could. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

www.kevinwood.blogfa.com 

