


Hamlet
Hamlet has fascinated audiences and readers for centuries,
and the first thing to point out about him is that he is enigmatic.
There is always more to him than the other characters in the play
can figure out; even the most careful and clever readers come away
with the sense that they don't know everything there is to know
about this character. Hamlet actually tells other characters that
there is more to him than meets the eye--notably, his mother, and
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern--but his fascination involves much more
than this. When he speaks, he sounds as if there's something important he's
not saying, maybe something even he is not aware of. The ability
to write soliloquies and dialogues that create this effect is one
of Shakespeare's most impressive achievements.

A university student whose studies are interrupted by
his father's death, Hamlet is extremely philosophical and contemplative.
He is particularly drawn to difficult questions or questions that
cannot be answered with any certainty. Faced with evidence that
his uncle murdered his father, evidence that any other character
in a play would believe, Hamlet becomes obsessed with proving his
uncle's guilt before trying to act. The standard of "beyond a reasonable doubt"
is simply unacceptable to him. He is equally plagued with questions
about the afterlife, about the wisdom of suicide, about what happens
to bodies after they die--the list is extensive.
But even though he is thoughtful to the point of obsession,
Hamlet also behaves rashly and impulsively. When he does act, it
is with surprising swiftness and little or no premeditation, as
when he stabs Polonius through a curtain without even checking to
see who he is. He seems to step very easily into the role of a madman,
behaving erratically and upsetting the other characters with his
wild speech and pointed innuendos.
It is also important to note that Hamlet is extremely
melancholy and discontented with the state of affairs in Denmark
and in his own family--indeed, in the world at large. He is extremely
disappointed with his mother for marrying his uncle so quickly,
and he repudiates Ophelia, a woman he once claimed to love, in the
harshest terms. His words often indicate his disgust with and distrust
of women in general. At a number of points in the play, he contemplates
his own death and even the option of suicide.
But, despite all of the things with which Hamlet professes
dissatisfaction, it is remarkable that the prince and heir apparent
of Denmark should think about these problems only in personal and philosophical
terms. He spends relatively little time thinking about the threats
to Denmark's national security from without or the threats to its
stability from within (some of which he helps to create through
his own carelessness).
