


[CHARACTER]
pilate can also be seen as the protagonist of song
of solomon because she is the novel's moral guide. although
the narrator rarely focuses on what pilate is feeling or thinking,
preferring instead to concentrate on milkman's quest, pilate's presence
is felt everywhere in the novel. despite being named after the roman
statesman who, according to the new testament, ordered jesus' crucifixion,
pilate is completely incapable of cruelty. it is more accurate to
see her name as a homonym for "pilot." she is frequently leading
someone who is in need of guidance, such as the skeleton of her
dead father, or milkman, during his spiritual journey.
although pilate's actions in the novel are less visible
than milkman's, her role is just as important. born without a navel
and alienated from others, pilate is a survivor of the same racism
that has embittered macon jr. and milkman. pilate is nevertheless
loving and selfless. her one regret when dying is that she could
not have loved more people. pilate's loving nature does not connote
weakness but rather strength. when a man beats her daughter, reba, pilate
pushes a knife within an inch of his heart and persuades him never
to touch reba again. even though she is in her sixties and reba's
abuser is a strong young man, pilate prevails. 
morrison suggests that pilate's supernatural powers, great strength,
lasting youthfulness, and boundless love come from african-american
cultural traditions. although pilate suffers the same disadvantages
as macon jr., she is still able to preserve a link to her family's
forgotten past. by singing folk songs about sugarman's flight, pilate
recreates a past in which her ancestors shed the yoke of oppression.
her recreation of this past sustains the characters who live in
the present. both macon jr., who secretly eavesdrops on her nightly
singing sessions, and milkman, who uses the songs to find his ancestral
home, shalimar, need pilate to keep alive the remaining vestiges
of their humanity. indeed, as milkman realizes at the end of his
journey, pilate is the only human being he knows who is able to fly
without ever leaving the ground. that is, she is already liberated and
does not need to escape to attain freedom. ultimately, pilate becomes
the novel's model character, showing that strength does not have
to come at the expense of gentleness, and that personal freedom
is not necessarily compromised by love for others. 
