


Rosalind
Rosalind dominates As You Like It. So
fully realized is she in the complexity of her emotions, the subtlety
of her thought, and the fullness of her character that no one else
in the play matches up to her. Orlando is handsome, strong, and
an affectionate, if unskilled, poet, yet still we feel that Rosalind
settles for someone slightly less magnificent when she chooses him
as her mate. Similarly, the observations of Touchstone and Jaques,
who might shine more brightly in another play, seem rather dull
whenever Rosalind takes the stage.

	The endless appeal of watching Rosalind has much to do
with her success as a knowledgeable and charming critic of herself
and others. But unlike Jaques, who refuses to participate wholly
in life but has much to say about the foolishness of those who surround him,
Rosalind gives herself over fully to circumstance. She chastises Silvius
for his irrational devotion to Phoebe, and she challenges Orlando's
thoughtless equation of Rosalind with a Platonic ideal, but still
she comes undone by her lover's inconsequential tardiness and faints
at the sight of his blood. That Rosalind can play both sides of
any field makes her identifiable to nearly everyone, and so, irresistible.
	Rosalind is a particular favorite among feminist critics,
who admire her ability to subvert the limitations that society imposes
on her as a woman. With boldness and imagination, she disguises
herself as a young man for the majority of the play in order to
woo the man she loves and instruct him in how to be a more accomplished, attentive
lover--a tutorship that would not be welcome from a woman. There
is endless comic appeal in Rosalind's lampooning of the conventions
of both male and female behavior, but an Elizabethan audience might
have felt a certain amount of anxiety regarding her behavior. After
all, the structure of a male-dominated society depends upon both
men and women acting in their assigned roles. Thus, in the end,
Rosalind dispenses with the charade of her own character. Her emergence
as an actor in the Epilogue assures that theatergoers, like the
Ardenne foresters, are about to exit a somewhat enchanted realm
and return to the familiar world they left behind. But because they
leave having learned the same lessons from Rosalind, they do so
with the same potential to make that world a less punishing place.
