


Jaques 
Jaques delights in being sad--a disparate role in a play
that so delights in happiness. Jaques believes that his melancholy
makes him the perfect candidate to be Duke Senior's fool. Such a
position, he claims, will "Give me leave / To speak my mind," and
the criticism that flows forth will "Cleanse the foul body of th'infected world"
(II.vii.58-60). Duke
Senior is rightly cautious about installing Jaques as the fool,
fearing that Jaques would do little more than excoriate the sins
that Jaques himself has committed. Indeed, Jaques lacks the keenness
of insight of Shakespeare's most accomplished jesters: he is not
as penetrating as Twelfth Night's Feste or King Lear's
fool. In fact, he is more like an aspiring fool than a professional
one. When Jaques philosophizes on the seven stages of human life,
for instance, his musings strike us as banal. His "All the world's
a stage" speech is famous today, but the play itself casts doubt
on the ideas expressed in this speech (II.vii.138).
No sooner does Jaques insist that man spends the final stages of
his life in "mere oblivion, / Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste,
sans everything" than Orlando's aged servant, Adam, enters, bearing
with him his loyalty, his incomparable service, and his undiminished
integrity (II.vii.164-165).
	Jaques's own faculties as a critic of the goings-on around
him are considerably diminished in comparison to Rosalind, who understands
so much more and conveys her understanding with superior grace and
charm. Rosalind criticizes in order to transform the world--to make
Orlando a more reasonable husband and Phoebe a less disdainful lover--whereas
Jaques is content to stew in his own melancholy. It is appropriate
that Jaques decides not to return to court. While the other characters
merrily revel, Jaques determines that he will follow the reformed
Duke Frederick into the monastery, where he believes the converts
have much to teach him. Jaques's refusal to resume life in the dukedom
not only confirms our impression of his character, but also resonates
with larger issues in the play. Here, the play makes good on the
promise of its title: everyone gets just what he or she wants. It
also betrays a small but inevitable crack in the community that
dances through the forest. In a world as complex and full of so
many competing forces as the one portrayed in As You Like
It, the absolute best one can hope for is consensus, but never
complete unanimity.
