 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(cid:3)

the secret life of bees 

sue monk kidd 

(cid:3)

 

 

back cover 

"the  bees  came  in  the  summer  of  1964,  the 
summer i turned fourteen and my life went spinning off 
into a whole new orbit, and i mean whole new orbit." 

living on a peach farm in south carolina with her 
harsh,  unyielding  father,  lily  owens  has  shaped  her 
entire life around one devastating, blurred memory the 
afternoon  her  mother  was  killed,  when  lily  was  four. 
since then, her only real companion has been the fierce-
hearted,  and  sometimes 
just  fierce,  black  woman 
rosaleen, who acts as her "stand-in mother." 

when  rosaleen  insults  three  of  the  deepest 
racists in town, lily knows it's time to spring them both 
free. they take off in the only direction lily can think of, 
toward a  town called tiburon, south carolina—a name 
she  found  on  the  back  of  a  picture  amid  the  few 
possessions left by her mother. 

there  they  are  taken  in  by  an  eccentric  trio  of  
black beekeeping sisters named may, june, and august. 
lily  thinks  of  them  as  the  calendar  sisters  and  enters 
their mesmerizing secret world of bees and honey, and 
of the black madonna who presides over this household 
of strong, wise women. maternal loss and betrayal, guilt 
and forgiveness entwine in a story that leads lily to the 
single thing her heart longs for most. 

the secret life of bees has a rare wisdom about 
life—about  mothers  and  daughters  and  the  women  in 
our lives who  become our true mothers. a remarkable 
story  about  the  divine  power  of  women  and  the 
transforming  power  of  love,  this  is  a  stunning  debut 
whose rich, assured, irresistible voice gathers us up and 
doesn't let go, not for a moment. it is the kind of novel 
that women share with each other and that mothers will 
hand down to their daughters for years to come. 

sue  monk  kidd  is  the  author  of  the  highly  
acclaimed memoirs the dance of the dissident daughter 
and  when  the  heart  waits.  she  has  won  a  poets  and 
writers award for the story that began this novel, as well 
as  a  katherine  anne  porter  award  and  a  bread  loaf  
scholarship. her fiction has appeared in  several literary 
journals,  and  two  of  her  stories  including  an  excerpt 
from  the  secret  life  of  bees  were  selected  as  notable 
stories in best american short stories. she lives beside a 
salt  marsh  near  charleston,  south  carolina.  the  secret 
life of bees is her first novel. 
 

 

acknowledgements 

i am deeply thankful to the following: my agent, 
virginia barber, for her enormous wisdom, support, and 
competence. my editor, pamela dorman, whose brilliant 
guidance and editing have made all the difference. the 
people at viking who have worked assiduously on behalf 
of  this  book—susan  petersen  kennedy,  clare  ferraro, 
nancy  sheppard,  carolyn  coleburn,  paul  slovak,  leigh 
butler,  hal  fessenden,  carla  bolte,  paul  buckley, 
roseanne  serra,  bruce  giffords,  maureen  sugden,  ann 
mah, and everyone in the sales department, which has 
been so supportive. 

dave and janice green, dedicated beekeepers at 
in  hemingway,  south 
pot  o'gold  honey  company 
carolina, who took me into their world of bees and were 
an invaluable source of help. poets and writers, inc., for 
its  superb  writers  exchange  program,  which  provided 
me  with  such  key  and  timely  opportunities  regarding 
this  novel.  nimrod,  the  literary  journal  that  published 
my  short  story  "the  secret  life  of  bees"  (fall/winter 
1993), on which the first chapter is based, giving me the 
encouragement  i  needed  to  develop  the  story  into  a 
novel. debbie daniel, writer and friend, who read early 
portions  of  the  book  and  offered  insights.  ann  kidd 
taylor, who read the manuscript as i wrote and gave me 
excellent  feedbackand  assistance.  terry  helwig,  trisha 

harrell,  carolyn  rivers,  susan  hull,  carol  graf,  donna 
farmer,  and 
lynne  acknowledgments  ravenel—
extraordinary  women,  who  saw  me  through.  my 
wonderful,  supportive  family—bob,  ann,  scott,  kellie, 
my  parents  (who  are  nothing  like  the  parents  in  this 
novel).  and  most  of  all,  my  husband,  sandy,  for  more 
reasons than i can name. 

chapter one 

the  queen,  for  her  part,  is  the  unifying 
force of the community; if she is removed from the 
hive,  the  workers  very  quickly  sense  her  absence. 
after  a  few  hours,  or  even  less,  they  show 
unmistakable signs of queenlessness. 

—man and insects 
 
at night i would lie in bed and watch the show, 
how bees squeezed through the cracks of my bedroom 
wall  and  flew  circles  around  the  room,  making  that 
propeller  sound,  a  high-pitched  zzzzzz  that  hummed 
along my skin. i watched their wings shining like bits of 
chrome  in  the  dark  and  felt  the  longing  build  in  my 
chest. the way those bees flew, not even looking for a 
flower, just flying for the feel of the wind, split my heart 
down its seam. 

during  the  day  i  heard  them  tunneling  through 
the walls of my bedroom, sounding like a radio tuned to 
static  in  the  next  room,  and  i  imagined  them  in  there 

 

7 

turning the walls into honeycombs, with honey seeping 
out for me to taste. 

the bees came the summer of 1964, the summer 
i  turned  fourteen  and  my  life  went  spinning  off  into  a  
whole new orbit, and i mean whole new orbit. looking 
back on now, i want to say the bees were sent to me. i 
want  to  say  they  showed  up  like  the  angel  gabriel 
appearing to the virgin mary, setting events in motion i 
could never have guessed. i know it is presumptuous to 
compare  my  small  life  to  hers,  but  i  have  reason  to  
believe she wouldn't mind; i will get to that. right now 
it's enough to say that despite everything that happened 
that summer, i remain tender toward the bees. 

• • • 
july 1, 1964, i lay in bed, waiting for the bees to 
show up, thinking of what rosaleen had said when i told 
her about their nightly visitations. 

"bees swarm before death," she'd said. 
rosaleen  had  worked  for  us  since  my  mother 
died.  my  daddy—who  i  called  t.  ray  because  "daddy" 
never fit him—had pulled her out of the peach orchard, 
where she'd worked as one of his pickers. she had a big 
round face and a body that sloped out from her neck like 
a pup  tent, and she was so  black that night seemed to 
seep  from  her  skin.  she  lived  alone  in  a  little  house  
tucked  back  in  the  woods,  not  far  from  us,  and  came  

 

8 

every  day  to  cook,  clean,  and  be  my  stand-in  mother. 
rosaleen  had  never  had  a  child  herself,  so  for  the  last 
ten years i'd been her pet guinea pig. 

bees  swarm  before  death.  she was  full of  crazy 
ideas  that  i  ignored, but  i lay  there thinking about  this 
one, wondering if the bees had come with my death in 
mind.  honestly,  i  wasn't  that  disturbed  by  the  idea. 
every  one  of  those  bees  could  have  descended  on  me 
like  a  flock  of  angels  and  stung  me  till  i  died,  and  it  
wouldn't  have  been the  worst  thing  to  happen. people 
who  think  dying  is  the  worst  thing  don't  know  a  thing 
about life. 

my mother died when i was four years old. it was 
a  fact  of  life,  but  if  i  brought  it  up,  people  would 
suddenly  get  interested  in  their  hangnails  and cuticles, 
or else distant places in the sky, and seem not to hear 
me.  once  in  a  while,  though,  some  caring  soul  would 
say, "just put it out of your head, lily. it was an accident. 
you didn't mean to do it." 

that night i  lay in bed and thought  about  dying 
and  going  tobe  with  my  mother  in  paradise.  i  would 
meet  her  saying,"mother,  forgive.  please  forgive,"  and 
she would kiss my skin tillit grew chapped and tell me i 
was not to blame. she would tell methis for the first ten 
thousand years. 

 

9 

the  next  ten  thousand  years  she  would  fix  my 
hair.  she  wouldbrush  it  into  such  a  tower  of  beauty, 
people  all  over  heaven  would  drop  their  harps  just  to 
admire  it.  you  can  tell  which  girls  lack  mothers  by  the 
look  of  their  hair.  my  hair  was  constantly  going  off  in 
eleven  wrong  directions,  and  t.  ray,  naturally,  refused 
to buy me bristle rollers, so all year i'd had to roll it on 
welch's  grape  juice  cans,  which  had  nearly  turned  me 
into  an  insomniac.  i  was  always  having  to  choose  
between decent hair and a good night's sleep. 

i  decided  i  would  take  four  or  five  centuries  to  
tell her about the special misery of living with t. ray. he 
had  an  orneriness  year-round,  but  especially  in  the 
summer, when he worked his peach orchards daylight to 
dusk. mostly  i stayed out of his way. his  only kindness 
was for snout, his bird dog, who slept in his bed and got 
her stomach scratched anytime she rolled onto her wiry 
back. i've seen snout pee on t. ray's boot and it not get 
a rise out of him. 

i  had  asked  god  repeatedly  to  do  something 
about  t.  ray.  he'd  gone  to  church  for  forty  years  and 
was  only  getting  worse.  it  seemed  like  this  should  tell 
god something. 

i kicked back the sheets. the room sat in perfect 
stillness, not one bee anywhere.  every minute i looked 

 

10 

at  the  clock  on  my  dresser  and  wondered  what  was 
keeping them. 

finally,  sometime  close  to  midnight,  when  my 
eyelids had nearly given up the strain of staying open, a 
purring  noise  started  over  in  the  corner,  low  and 
vibrating,  a  sound  you  could  almost  mistake  for  a  cat. 
moments later shadows moved like spatter paint along 
the  walls,  catching  the  light  when  they  passed  the 
window so i could see the outline of wings. the sound 
swelled in the dark till the entire room was pulsating, till 
the air itself became alive and matted with bees. they 
lapped around my body, making me the  perfect center 
of a whirlwind cloud. i could not hear myself think for all 
the bee hum. 

i  dug  my  nails  into  my  palms  till  my  skin  had  
nearly turned to herringbone. a person could get stung 
half to death in a roomful of bees. 

still,  the  sight  was  a  true  spectacle.  suddenly  i 
couldn't stand not  showing  it off  to somebody, even  if 
the only person around was t. ray. and if he happened 
to  get  stung  by  a  couple  of  hundred  bees,  well,  i  was 
sorry. 

i  slid  from  the  covers  and  dashed  through  the 
bees for the door. i woke him by touching his arm with 
one  finger,  softly  at  first,  then  harder  and  harder  till  i 
was jabbing into his flesh, marveling at how hard it was. 

 

11 

t. ray bolted from bed, wearing nothing but his 
underwear. 
i  dragged  him  toward  my  room,  him 
shouting how this better be good, how the house damn 
well better be on fire, and snout barking like we were on 
a dove shoot. 

"bees!"  i  shouted.  "there's  a  swarm  of  bees  in 

my room!" 

but  when  we  got  there,  they'd  vanished  back 
into  the  wall  like  they  knew  he  was  coming,  like  they 
didn't want to waste their flying stunts on him. 

"goddamn it, lily, this ain't funny." 
i looked up and down the walls. i got down under 
the  bed  and  begged  the  very  dust  and  coils  of  my 
bedsprings to produce a bee. 

"they were here," i said. "flying everywhere." 
"yeah, and there was a goddamn herd of buffalo 

in here, too." 

"listen," i said. "you can hear them buzzing." 
he cocked his ear toward the wall with pretend 
seriousness.  "i  don't  hear  any  buzzing,"  he  said,  and 
twirled his finger beside his temple. "i guess they must 
have flown out of that cuckoo clock you call a brain. you 
wake  me  up  again,  lily,  and  i'll  get  out  the  martha  
whites, you hear me?" 

martha whites were a form of punishment only 
t.  ray  could  have  dreamed  up.  i  shut  my  mouth 

 

12 

instantly. still, i couldn't let the matter go entirely— t. 
ray  thinking  i  was  so  desperate  i  would  invent  an  
invasion of bees to get attention. 

which is how i got the bright idea of catching a 
jar of these bees, presenting them to t. ray, and saying, 
"now who's making things up?" 

• • • 
my first and only memory of my mother was the 
day  she  died.  i  tried  for  a  long  time  to  conjure  up  an  
image of her before that, just a sliver of something, like 
her  tucking  me  into  bed,  reading  the  adventures  of 
uncle  wiggly,  or  hanging  my  underclothes  near  the 
space  heater  on  ice-cold  mornings.  even  her  picking  a 
switch off the forsythia bush and stinging my legs would 
have been welcome. 

the  day  she  died  was  december  3,  1954-  the 
furnace  had  cooked  the  air  so  hot  my  mother  had 
peeled  off  her  sweater  and  stood  in  short  sleeves, 
jerking  at  the  window  in  her  bedroom,  wrestling  with 
the stuck paint. 

finally she gave up and said, "well, fine, we'll just 

burn the hell up in here, i guess." 

her hair was black and generous, with thick curls 
circling  her  face,  a  face  i  could  never  quite  coax  into  
view, despite the sharpness of everything else. 

 

13 

i raised my  arms  to her, and she picked  me up, 
saying  i  was  way  too  big  a  girl  to  hold  like  this,  but  
holding  me  anyway.  the  moment  she  lifted  me,  i  was  
wrapped in her smell. 

the  scent  got  laid  down  in  me  in  a  permanent  
way and had all the precision of cinnamon. i used to go 
regularly  into  the  sylvan  mercantile  and  smell  every 
perfume bottle they had, trying to identify it. every time 
i showed  up, the  perfume lady acted  surprised,  saying, 
"my goodness, look who's here." like i hadn't just been 
in there the week before and gone down the entire row 
of bottles. shalimar, chanel no. 5, white shoulders. 

i'd say, "you got anything new?" 
she never did. 
so it was a shock when i came upon the scent on 
my fifth-grade teacher, who said it was nothing but plain 
ordinary ponds cold cream. 

the  afternoon  my  mother  died,  there  was  a 
suitcase  open  on  the  floor,  sitting  near  the  stuck 
window.  she moved in and  out of  the closet, dropping 
this  and  that  into  the  suitcase,  not  bothering  to  fold 
them. 

i  followed  her  into  the  closet  and  scooted 
beneath  dress  hems  and  pant  legs,  into  darkness  and 
wisps of dust and little dead moths, back where orchard 
mud  and  the  moldy  smell  of  peaches  clung  to  t.  ray's 

 

14 

boots. i stuck my hands inside a pair of white high heels 
and clapped them together. 

the  closet  floor  vibrated  whenever  someone 
climbed the stairs below it, which is how i knew t. ray 
was  coming.  over  my head  i heard  my  mother,  pulling 
things  from  the  hangers,  the  swish  of  clothes,  wire 
clinking  together.  hurry,  she  said.  when  his  shoes 
clomped  into  the  room,  she  sighed,  the  breath  leaving 
her as if her lungs had suddenly clenched. 

this  is  the  last  thing  i  remember  with  perfect 
crispness—her  breath  floating  down  to  me  like  a  tiny 
parachute, collapsing without a trace among the piles of 
shoes. 

i don't remember what they said, only the fury of 
their  words,  how  the  air  turned  raw  and  full  of  welts. 
later  it  would  remind  me  of  birds  trapped  inside  a 
closed  room,  flinging  themselves  against  the  windows 
and  the  walls,  against  each  other.  i  inched  backward, 
deeper into the closet, feeling my fingers in my mouth, 
the taste of shoes, of feet. 

dragged out, i didn't know at first whose hands 
pulled  me,  then  found  myself  in  my  mother's  arms, 
breathing her smell. she smoothed my hair, said, "don't 
worry," but even as she said it, i was peeled away by t. 
ray. he carried me to the door and set me down in the 
hallway. "go to your room," he said. 

 

15 

"i don't want to," i cried, trying to push past him, 

back into the room, back where she was. 

"get in your goddamned room!" he shouted, and 
shoved me. i landed against the wall, then fell forward 
onto my hands and knees. lifting my head, looking past 
him, i saw her running across the room. running at him, 
yelling. "leave. her. alone." 

i  huddled  on  the  floor  beside  the  door  and 
watched through air that seemed all scratched up. i saw 
him take her by the shoulders and shake her, her head 
bouncing back and forth. i saw the whiteness of his lip. 

and then—though everything starts to blur now 
in my mind—she lunged away from him into the closet, 
away from his grabbing hands, scrambling for something 
high on a shelf. 

when  i  saw  the  gun  in  her  hand,  i  ran  toward  
her, clumsy and falling, wanting to save her, to save us 
all. time folded in on itself then. what is left lies in clear 
yet disjointed pieces in my head. the gun shining like a 
toy in her hand, how he snatched it away and waved it 
around. the gun on the floor. bending to pick it up. the 
noise that exploded around us. 

this  is  what  i  know  about  myself.  she  was  all  i  

wanted. and i took her away. 

• • • 

 

16 

t.  ray  and  i  lived  just  outside  sylvan,  south 
carolina,  population  3000.  peach  stands  and  baptist 
churches, that sums it up. 

at the entrance to the farm we had a big wooden 
sign with owens peach enterprises painted across it 
in the worst orange color you've ever seen. i hated that 
sign. but the sign was nothing compared with the giant 
peach  perched  atop  a  sixty-foot  pole  beside  the  gate. 
everyone at school referred to it as the great fanny, and 
i'm  cleaning  up  the  language.  its  fleshy  color,  not  to 
mention  the  crease  down  the  middle,  gave  it  the 
unmistakable appearance of a rear end. rosaleen said it 
was t. ray's way of mooning the entire world. that was 
t. ray. 

he didn't believe in slumber parties or sock hops, 
which wasn't a big concern as i never got invited to them 
anyway, but he refused to drive me to town for football 
games, pep rallies, or beta club car washes, which were 
held on saturdays. he did not care that i wore clothes i 
made for myself in home economics class, cotton print 
shirtwaists  with  crooked  zippers  and  skirts  hanging 
below my knees, outfits only the pentecostal girls wore. 
i might as well have worn a sign on my back: i am not 
popular and never will be. 

i needed all the help that fashion could give me, 
since  no  one,  not  a  single  person,  had  ever  said,  "lily, 

 

17 

you are such a pretty child," except for miss jennings at 
church, and she was legally blind. 

i  watched  my  reflection  not  only  in  the  mirror, 
but in store windows and across the television when it 
wasn't on, trying to get a fix on my looks. my hair was 
black like my mother's but basically a nest of  cowlicks, 
and  it  worried  me  that  i  didn't  have  much  of  a  chin.  i  
kept  thinking  i'd  grow  one  the  same  time  my  breasts 
came in, but it didn't work out that way. i had nice eyes, 
though, what you would call sophia loren eyes, but still, 
even the boys who wore their hair in ducktails dripping 
with  vitalis  and  carried  combs  in  their  shirt  pockets 
didn't seem attracted to me, and they were considered 
hard up. 

matters below my neck had shaped up, not that i 
could  show  off  that  part.  it  was  fashionable  to  wear 
cashmere  twinsets  and  plaid  kilts  midthigh,  but  t.  ray 
said  hell  would  be  an  ice  rink  before  i  went  out  like 
that—did i want  to  end up  pregnant  like  bitsy johnson 
whose skirt barely covered her ass? how he knew about 
bitsy is a mystery of life, but it was true about her skirts 
and true about the baby. an unfortunate coincidence is 
all it was. 

rosaleen  knew  less  about  fashion  than  t.  ray  
did, and when it was cold, god-help-me-jesus, she made 

 

18 

me  go  to  school  wearing  long  britches  under  my 
pentecostal dresses. 

there was nothing i hated worse than clumps of 
whispering girls who got quiet when i passed. i started 
picking scabs off my body and, when i didn't have any, 
gnawing  the  flesh  around  my  fingernails  till  i  was  a 
bleeding wreck.  i worried so  much about how  i looked 
and whether i was doing things right, i felt half the time i 
was impersonating a girl instead of really being one. 

i had thought my real chance would come from 
going to charm school at the women's club last spring, 
friday afternoons for six weeks, but i got barred because 
i didn't have a mother, a grandmother, or even a measly 
aunt  to  present  me  with  a  white  rose  at  the  closing  
ceremony.  rosaleen  doing  it  was  against  the  rules.  i'd 
cried till i threw up in the sink. 

"you're  charming  enough,"  rosaleen  had  said, 
washing the vomit out of the sink basin. "you don't need 
to go to some highfalutin school to get charm." 

"i do so," i said. "they teach everything. how to 
walk and pivot, what to do with your ankles when you sit 
in a chair, how to get into a car, pour tea, take off your 
gloves…" 

rosaleen blew air from her lips. "good lord," she 

said. 

 

19 

"arrange flowers in a vase, talk to boys, tweeze 

your eyebrows, shave your legs, apply lipstick…" 

"what  about  vomit  in  a  sink?  they  teach  a 

charming way to do that?" she asked. 
sometimes i purely hated her. 
the morning after i woke t. ray, rosaleen stood 
in the doorway of my room, watching me chase a bee 
with a mason jar. her lip was rolled out so far i could see 
the little sunrise of pink inside hermouth. 

"what are you doing with that jar?" she said. 
"i'm catching bees to show t. ray. hethinks i'm 

making them up." 

"lord,  give  me  strength."  she'd  been  shelling 
butter beans on the  porch,  and sweat  glistened on the 
pearls  of  hair  around  her  forehead.  she  pulled  at  the 
front of her dress, opening an airway along her bosom, 
big and soft as couch pillows. 

the bee  landed on the state  map  i kept  tacked 
on the wall. i watched it walk along the coast of south 
carolina on scenic highway 17. i clamped the mouth of 
the jar against the wall, trapping it between charleston 
and georgetown.  when i  slid on the  lid,  it  went  into  a 
tailspin, throwing itself against  the glass over  and over 
with  pops  and  clicks,  reminding  me  of  the  hail  that 
landed sometimes on the windows. 

 

20 

i'd  made  the  jar  as  nice  as  i  could  with  felty  
petals, fat with pollen, and more than enough nail holes 
in the lid to keep the bees from perishing, since for all i 
knew, people might come back one day as the very thing 
they killed. 

i brought the jar level with my nose. "come look 

at this thing fight," i said to rosaleen. 

when she stepped in the room, her scent floated 
out  to  me,  dark  and  spicy  like  the  snuff  she  packed 
inside her cheek. she held her small jug with its coin-size 
mouth and a handle for her to loop her finger through. i 
watched her press it along her  chin, her  lips fluted out 
like a flower, then spit a curl of black juice inside it. 

she stared at the bee and shook her head. "if you 
get stung, don't come whining to me," she said, "'cause i 
ain't gonna care." 

that was a lie. 
i  was  the  only  one  who  knew  that  despite  her 
sharp  ways,  her  heart  was  more  tender  than  a  flower 
skin and she loved me beyond reason. 

i  hadn't  known  this  until  i  was  eight  and  she 
bought me an easter-dyed biddy from the mercantile. i 
found  it  trembling  in  a  corner  of  its  pen,  the  color  of  
purple grapes, with sad little eyes that cast around for its 
mother.  rosaleen  let  me  bring  it  home,  right  into  the 
living  room,  where  i  strewed  a  box  of  quaker  oats  on 

 

21 

the  floor  for  it  to  eat  and  she  didn't  raise  a  word  of  
protest. 

the  chick 

left  dollops  of  violet-streaked 
droppings all over the place, due, i suppose, to the dye 
soaking  into  its  fragile  system.  we  had  just  started  to 
clean them up when t. ray burst in, threatening to boil 
the  chick  for  dinner  and  fire  rosaleen  for  being  an  
imbecile.  he  started  to  swoop  at  the  biddy  with  his  
tractor  grease  hands,  but  rosaleen  planted  herself  in 
front of him. 

"there is worse things in the house than chicken 
shit," she said and looked him up one side and down the 
other. "you ain't touching tha chick." 

his boots whispered uncle all the way down the 
hall.  i  thought,  she  loves  me,  and  it  was  the  first  time  
such a far-fetched idea had occurred to me. 

her age was a mystery, since she didn't possess a 
birth certificate. she would tell me she was born in 1909 
or 1919, depending on how old she felt at the moment. 
she  was  sure  about  the  place:  mcclellanville,  south 
carolina,  where  her  mama  had  woven  sweet-grass 
baskets and sold them on the roadside. 

"like me selling peaches," i'd said to her. 
"not  one  thing  like  you  selling  peaches,"  she'd 
said  back. "you  ain't got seven children you gotta feed 
from it." 

 

22 

"you've got six brothers and sisters?" i'd thought 

of her as alone in the world except for me. 

"i  did  have,  but  i  don't  know  where  a  one  of 

them is." 

she'd thrown her husband out three years after 
they married, for carousing. "you put his brain in a bird, 
the  bird  would  fly  backward,"  she  liked  to  say.  i  often 
wondered  what  that  bird  would  do  with  rosaleen's 
brain. i decided half the time it would drop shit on your 
head and the other half it would sit on abandoned nests 
with its wings spread wide. 

i used to have daydreams in which she was white 
and married t. ray, and became my real mother. other 
times i was a negro orphan she found in a cornfield and 
adopted.  once  in  a  while  i  had  us  living  in  a  foreign 
country  like  new  york, where  she  could  adopt  me and 
we could both stay our natural color. 

• • • 
my mother's name was deborah. i thought that 
was  the  prettiest  name  i'd  ever  heard,  even  though  t. 
ray refused to speak it. if i said it, he acted like he might 
go  straight  to  the  kitchen  and  stab  something.  once 
when i asked him when her birthday was and what cake 
icing  she preferred, he told me  to shut  up, and  when i 
asked  him  a  second  time,  he  picked  up  a  jar  of  

 

23 

blackberry jelly and threw it against the kitchen cabinet. 
we have blue stains to this day. 

i did manage to get a few scraps of information 
from  him,  though,  such  as  my  mother  was  buried  in 
virginia where her people came from. i got worked up at 
that, thinking i'd found a grandmother. no, he tells me, 
my  mother  was  an only  child  whose  mother  died  ages 
ago. naturally. once when he stepped on a roach in the 
kitchen,  he told  me  my  mother  had  spent  hours  luring 
roaches out of the house with bits of marshmallow and 
trails of graham-cracker crumbs, that she was a lunatic 
when it came to saving bugs. 

the  oddest  things  caused  me  to  miss  her.  like  
training  bras.  who  was  i  going  to  ask  about  that?  and 
who but my mother could're understood the magnitude 
of  driving  me  to  junior  cheerleader  tryouts?  i  can  tell 
you for certain t. ray didn't grasp it. but you know when 
i missed her the most? the day i was twelve and woke 
up  with  the  rose-petal  stain  on  my  panties.  i  was  so  
proud of that flower and didn't have a soul to show it to 
except rosaleen. 

not  long  after  that  i  found  a  paper  bag  in  the 
attic stapled at the top. inside it i found the last traces of 
my mother. 

there was a photograph of a woman smirking in 
front  of  an  old  car,  wearing  a  light-colored  dress  with 

 

24 

padded shoulders. her expression said, "don't you dare 
take  this  picture,"  but  she  wanted  it  taken,  you  could 
see that. you could not believe the stories i saw in that 
picture, how she was waiting at the car fender for love 
to come to her, and not too patiently. 

i  laid  the  photograph  beside  my  eighth-grade 
picture and examined every possible similarity. she was 
more or less missing a chin, too, but even so, she was 
above-average  pretty,  which  offered  me  genuine  hope 
for my future. 

the bag contained a pair of white cotton gloves 
stained  the  color  of  age.  when  i  pulled  them  out,  i  
thought, her very hands were inside here. i feel foolish 
about  it  now,  but  one  time  i  stuffed  the  gloves  with  
cotton balls and held them through the night. 

 the  mother  of  jesus.

the  end-all  mystery  inside  the  bag  was  a  small 
 i
wooden  picture  of  mary,
recognized  her  even  though  her  skin  was  black,  only  a 
shade  lighter  than  rosaleen's.  it  looked  to  me  like 
somebody had cut the black mary's picture from a book, 
glued it onto a sanded piece of wood about two inches 
across, and varnished it. on the back an unknown hand 
had written "tiburon, s.c." 

for two years now i'd kept these things of hers 
inside  a  tin  box,  buried  in  the  orchard.  there  was  a 
special place out there in the long tunnel of trees no one 

 

 

25 

knew about, not even rosaleen. i'd started going there 
before i could tie my shoelaces. at first it was just a spot 
to  hide  from  t.  ray  and  his  meanness  or  from  the  
memory  of  that  afternoon  when  the  gun went  off,  but 
later i would slip out there, sometimes after t. ray had 
gone to bed, just to lie under the trees and be peaceful. 
it was my plot of earth, my cubbyhole. 

i'd placed her things inside the tin box and buried 
it  out  there  late  one  night  by  flashlight,  too  scared  to  
leave  them  hanging  around  in  my  room,  even  in  the 
back of a drawer. i was afraid t. ray might go up to the 
attic and discover her things were missing, and turn my 
room upside down searching for them. i hated to think 
what he'd do to me if he found them hidden among my 
stuff. 

now  and  then  i'd  go  out  there  and  dig  up  the 
box. i would lie on the ground with the trees folded over 
me,  wearing  her  gloves,  smiling  at  her  photograph.  i  
would  study  "tiburon,  s.c."  on  the  back  of  the  black 
mary  picture,  the  funny  slant  of  the  lettering,  and 
wonder what sort of place it was. 

i'd  looked it up  on  the  map once,  and it  wasn't 
more than two hours away. had my mother been there 
and bought  this picture? i always  promised myself  one 
day, when i was grown-up enough, i would take the bus 

 

26 

over  there.  i  wanted  to  go  everyplace  she  had  ever  
been. 

• • • 
after my morning of capturing bees, i spent the 
afternoon in the peach stand out on the highway, selling 
t. ray's peaches. it was the loneliest summer job a girl 
could have, stuck in a roadside hut with three walls and 
a flat tin roof. 

i sat on a coke crate and watched pickups zoom 
by  till  i  was  nearly  poisoned  with  exhaust  fumes  and 
boredom. thursday afternoons were usually a big peach 
day, with women getting ready for sunday cobblers, but 
not a soul stopped. t. ray refused to let me bring books 
out here and read, and if i smuggled one out, say, lost 
horizon,  stuck  under  my  shirt,  somebody,  like  mrs. 
watson  from  the  next  farm,  would  see  him  at  church  
and say, "saw your girl in the peach stand reading up a 
storm. you must be proud." and he would half kill me. 

what kind of person is against reading? i think he 
believed  it  would  stir  up  ideas  of  college,  which  he 
thought a waste of money for girls, even if they did, like 
me, score the highest number a human being can get on 
their  verbal  aptitude  test.  math  aptitude  is  another 
thing,  but  people  aren't  meant  to  be  overly  bright  in 
everything. 

 

27 

i  was  the  only  student  who  didn't  groan  and 
carry  on  when  mrs.  henry  assigned  us  another 
shakespeare play. well actually, i did pretend to groan, 
but inside i was as thrilled as if i'd been crowned sylvan's 
peach queen. 

up  until  mrs.  henry  came  along,  i'd  believed 
beauty  college  would  be  the  upper  limit  of  my  career.  
once,  studying  her  face,  i  told  her  if  she  was  my  
customer, i would give her a french twist that would do 
wonders for her, ad she said—and i quote—"please, lily, 
you are insulting your fine intelligence. do you have any 
idea how smart you are? you could be a professor or a 
writer with actual  books to  your  credit. beauty school. 
please." 

it  took  me  a  month  to  get  over  the  shock  of  
having life possibilities. you know how adults love to ask, 
"so…  what  are  you  going  to  be  when  you  grow  up?"  i  
can't  tell  you  how  much  i'd  hated  that  question,  but 
suddenly  i  was  going  around  volunteering  to  people, 
people who didn't even want to know, that i planned to 
be a professor and a writer of actual books. 

i  kept  a  collection  of  my  writings.  for  a  while 
everything i wrote had a horse in it. after we read ralph 
waldo emerson in class, i wrote "my philosophy of life," 
which  i  intended  for  the  start  of  a  book  but  could  get 
only three pages out of it. mrs. henry said i needed to 

 

28 

live  past  fourteen  years  old  before  i  would  have  a 
philosophy. 

she  said  a  scholarship  was  my  only  hope  for  a 
future  and  lent  me  her  private  books  for  the  summer. 
whenever i opened one, t. ray said, "who do you think 
you are, julius shakespeare?" the man sincerely thought 
that  was  shakespeare's  first  name,  and  if  you  think  i 
should have corrected  him, you are ignorant about  the 
art  of  survival.  he  also  referred  to  me  as  miss  brown-
nose-in-a-book and occasionally as miss emily-big-head-
diction. he meant dickinson, but again, there are things 
you let go by. 

without books in the peach stand, i often passed 
the  time  making  up  poems,  but  that  slow  afternoon  i 
didn't have the patience for rhyming words. i just sat out 
there  and  thought  about  how  much  i  hated  the  peach 
stand, how completely and absolutely i hated it. 

• • • 
the day before i'd gone to first grade, t. ray had 
found me in the peach stand sticking a nail into one of 
his  peaches.  he  walked  toward  me  with  his  thumbs 
jammed into his pockets and his eyes squinted half shut 
from the glare. i watched his shadow slide over the dirt 
and weeds and thought he had  come to punish me for 
stabbing a peach. i didn't even know why i was doing it. 

 

29 

instead  he  said,  "lily,  you're  starting  school 
tomorrow, so there are things you need to know. about 
your mother." 

for a moment everything got still and quiet, as if 
the  wind  had  died  and  the  birds  had  stopped  flying. 
when he squatted down in front of me, i felt caught in a 
hot dark i could not break free of. 

"it's time you knew what happened to her, and i 
want you to hear it from me. not from people out there 
talking." 

we had never spoken of this, and i felt a shiver 
pass over me. the memory of that day would come back 
to me at odd moments. the stuck window. the smell of 
her. the clink of hangers. the suitcase. the way they'd 
fought and shouted. most of all the gun on the floor, the 
heaviness when i'd lifted it. 

i knew that the explosion i'd heard that day had 
killed her. the sound still sneaked into my head once in 
a  while  and  surprised  me.  sometimes  it  seemed  that 
when i'd held the gun there hadn't been any noise at all, 
that it had come later, but other times, sitting alone on 
the back steps, bored and wishing for something to do, 
or pent up in my room on a rainy day, i felt i had caused 
it,  that  when  i'd  lifted  the  gun,  the  sound  had  torn 
through the room and gouged out our hearts. 

 

30 

it was a secret knowledge that would slip up and 
overwhelm me, and i would take off running—even if it 
was  raining  out,  i  ran—straight  down  the  hill  to  my  
special place in the peach orchard. i'd lie right down on 
the ground and it would calm me. 

now, t. ray scooped up a handful of dirt and let 
if  fall  out  of  his  hands.  "the  day  she  died,  she  was 
cleaning out the closet," he said. i could not account for 
the strange tone of his voice, an unnatural sound, how it 
was almost, but not quite, kind. 

cleaning the closet. i had never considered what 
she  was  doing  those  last  minutes  of  her  life,  why  she 
was in the closet, what they had fought about. 

"i  remember,"  i  said.  my  voice  sounded  small 
and faraway to me, like it was coming from an ant hole 
in the ground. 

his  eyebrows  lifted,  and  he  brought  his  face 
closer  to  me.  only  his  eyes  showed  confusion.  "you 
what?" 

"i remember," i said again. "you were yelling at 

each other." 

a  tightening came into his  face.  "is  that right?" 
he said. his lips had started to turn pale, which was the 
thing i always watched for. i took a step backward. 

"goddamn  it,  you  were  four  years  old!"  he 

shouted. "you don't know what you remember." 

 

31 

in the silence that followed, i considered lying to 
him,  saying,  i  take  it  back.  i  don't  remember  anything. 
tell me what happened, but there was such a powerful 
need in me, pent up for so long, to speak about it, to say 
the words. 

i  looked  down  at  my  shoes,  at  the  nail  i'd  

dropped when i'd seen him coming. "there was a gun." 

"christ," he said. 
he looked at me a long time, then walked over to 
the bushel baskets stacked at the back of the stand. he 
stood there a minute with his hands balled up before he 
turned  around  and  came  back.  "what  else?"  he  said. 
"you tell me right now what you know." 

"the gun was on the floor—" 
"and  you  picked  it  up,"  he  said.  "i  guess  you 

remember that." 

the exploding sound had started to echo around 
in my head. i looked off in the direction of the orchard, 
wanting to break and run. 

"i remember picking it up," i said. "but that's all." 
he  leaned  down  and held  me by  the shoulders, 
gave  me  a  little  shake.  "you  don't  remember  anything 
else? you're sure? now, think." 

i paused  so  long  he cocked his  head,  looking  at 

me, suspicious. 

"no, sir, that's all." 

 

32 

"listen to me," he said, his fingers squeezing into 
my arms. "we were arguing like you said. we didn't see 
you  at  first.  then  we  turned  around  and  you  were 
standing  there  holding  the  gun.  you'd  picked  it  up  off 
the floor. then it just went off." 

he  let  me  go  and  rammed  his  hands  into  his 
pockets. i could hear his hands jingling keys and nickels 
and pennies. i wanted so much to grab on to his leg, to 
feel  him  reach  down  and  lift  me  to  his  chest,  but  i  
couldn't move, and neither did he. he stared at a place 
over  my  head.  a  place  he  was  being  very  careful  to  
study. 

"the  police  asked  lots  of  questions,  but  it  was 
just one of those terrible things. you didn't mean to do 
it," he said softly. "but if anybody wants to know, that's 
what happened." 

then  he  left,  walking  back  toward  the  house. 
he'd gone only a little way when he looked back.  "and 
don't stick that nail into my peaches again." 

• • • 
it was after 6:00 p.m. when i wandered back to 
the  house  from  the  peach  stand,  having  sold  nothing, 
not  one  peach,  and  found  rosaleen in the  living  room. 
usually  she  would've  gone  home  by  now,  but  she  was 
wrestling with the rabbit ears on top of the tv, trying to 
fix the snow on the screen. president johnson faded in 

 

33 

and out, lost in the blizzard. i'd never seen rosaleen so 
interested  in  a  tv  show  that  she  would  exert  physical 
energy over it. 

"what  happened?"  i  asked.  "did  they  drop  the 
atom  bomb?"  ever  since  we'd  started  bomb  drills  at 
school, i couldn't help thinking my days were numbered. 
everybody  was  putting 
their 
backyards, canning tap water, getting ready for the end 
of  time.  thirteen  students  in  my  class  made  fallout 
shelter models for their science project, which shows it 
was  not  just  me  worried  about  it.  we  were  obsessed 
with mr. khrushchev and his missiles. 

fallout  shelters 

in 

"no,  the  bomb  hasn't  gone  off,"  she  said.  "just 
come here and see if you can fix the tv." her fists were 
burrowed  so  deep 
into  her  hips  they  seemed  to 
disappear. 

i  twisted  tin  foil  around  the  antennae.  things 
cleared up enough to make out president johnson taking 
his seat at a desk, people all around. i didn't care much 
for the president because of the way he held his beagles 
by the ears. i did admire his wife, lady bird, though, who 
always  looked  like  she  wanted  nothing  more  than  to 
sprout wings and fly away. 

rosaleen dragged the footstool in front of the set 
and  sat  down,  so  the  whole  thing  vanished  under  her. 

 

34 

she leaned toward the set, holding a piece of her skirt 
and winding it around in her hands. 

"what is going on?" i said, but she was so caught 
up in whatever  was  happening  she  didn't  even  answer 
me.  on the  screen  the  president signed  his  name on a 
piece of paper, using about ten ink pens to get it done. 

"rosaleen—" 
"shhh," she said, waving her hand. 
i had to get the news from the tv man. "today, 
july second, 1964," he said, "the president of the united 
states  signed  the  civil  rights  act  into  law  in  the  east  
room of the white house." 

i looked over at rosaleen, who sat there shaking 
her head, mumbling, "lord have mercy," just looking so 
disbelieving  and  happy,  like  people  on  television  when 
they answered the $64,000 question. 

i  didn't  know  whether  to  be  excited  for  her  or  
worried. all people ever talked about after church were 
the  negroes  and  whether  they'd  get  their  civil  rights. 
who  was  winning—the  white  people's  team  or  the 
colored people's team? like it was a do-or-die contest. 
when  that  minister  from  alabama,  reverend  martin 
luther  king,  got  arrested  last  month  in  florida  for 
wanting to eat in a restaurant, the men at church acted 
like the white people's team had won the pennant race. 

 

35 

i knew they would not take this news lying down, not in 
one million years. 

"hallelujah,  jesus,"  rosaleen  was  saying  over 

there on her stool. oblivious. 

• • • 
rosaleen  had  left  dinner  on  the  stove  top,  her 
famous  smothered  chicken.  as  i  fixed  t.  ray's  plate,  i 
considered  how  to  bring  up  the  delicate  matter  of  my 
birthday, something t. ray had never paid attention to 
in all the years of my life, but every year, like a dope, i 
got my hopes up thinking this year would be the one. 

i  had  the  same  birthday  as  the  country,  which 
made it even harder to get noticed. when i was little, i 
thought  people  were  sending  up  rockets  and  cherry 
bombs  because  of  me—hurray,  lily  was  born!  then 
reality set in, like it always did. 

i wanted to tell t. ray that any girl would love a 
silver charm bracelet, that in fact last year i'd been the 
only  girl  at  sylvan  junior  high  without  one,  that  the 
whole point of lunchtime was to stand in the cafeteria 
line  jangling  your  wrist,  giving  people  a  guided  tour  of 
your charm collection. 

"so," i said, sliding his plate in front of him, "my 

birthday is this saturday." 

i watched him pull the chicken meat from around 

the bone with his fork. 

 

36 

"i was just thinking i would love to have one of 
those  silver  charm  bracelets  they  have  down  at  the 
mercantile." 

the  house  creaked  like  it  did  once  in  a  while. 
outside the door snout gave a low bark, and then the air 
grew so quiet i could hear the food being ground up in t. 
ray's mouth. 

he  ate  his  chicken  breast  and  started  on  the 

thigh, looking at me now and then in his hard way. 

i  started  to  say,  so  then,  what  about  the 
bracelet? but i could see he'd already given his answer, 
and  it  caused  a  kind  of  sorrow  to  rise  in  me  that  felt  
fresh and tender and had nothing, really, to do with the 
bracelet. i think now it was sorrow for the sound of his 
fork scraping the plate, the way it swelled in the distance 
between us, how i was not even in the room. 

• • • 
that night i lay in bed listening to the flicks and 
twitters and thrums inside the bee jar, waiting till it was 
late enough so i could slip out to the orchard and dig up 
the tin box that held my mother's things. i wanted to lie 
down in the orchard and let it hold me. 

when the darkness had pulled the moon to the 
top  of  the  sky,  i  got  out  of  bed,  put  on  my  shorts  and  
sleeveless  blouse,  and  glided  past  t.  ray's  room  in 
silence,  sliding  my  arms  and  legs  like  a  skater  on  ice.  i  

 

37 

didn't  see  his  boots,  how  he'd  parked  them  in  the 
middle of the hall. when i fell, the clatter startled the air 
so badly t. ray's snore changed rhythm. at first it ceased 
altogether,  but  then  the  snore  started  back with  three 
piglet snorts. 

i  crept  down  the  stairs,  through  the  kitchen. 
when  the  night  hit  my  face,  i  felt  like  laughing.  the 
moon  was  a  perfect  circle,  so  full  of  light  that  all  the  
edges of things had an amber cast. the cicadas rose up, 
and  i  ran  with  bare  feet  across  the  grass.  to  reach  my  
spot  i  had  to  go  to  the  eighth  row  left  of  the  tractor 
shed, then walk along it, counting trees till i got to thirty-
two. 

the  tin  box  was  buried  in  the  soft  dirt  beneath 
the tree, shallow enough that i could dig it up with my 
hands. 

when i brushed the dirt from the lid and opened 
it,  i  saw  first  the  whiteness  of  her  gloves,  then  the 
photograph  wrapped in waxed  paper,  just  as  i'd  left  it. 
and finally the funny wooden picture of mary with the 
dark  face.  i  took  everything  out,  and,  stretching  out 
among  the  fallen  peaches,  i  rested  them  across  my  
abdomen. 

when i looked up through the web of trees, the 
night  fell  over  me,  and  for  a  moment  i  lost  my  
boundaries, feeling like the sky was my own skin and the 

 

38 

moon  was  my  heart  beating  up  there  in  the  dark. 
lightning  came,  not  jagged  but  in  soft,  golden  licks 
across  the  sky.  i  undid  the  buttons  on  my  shirt  and 
opened  it  wide,  just  wanting the night  to  settle on my 
skin,  and  that's  how  i  fell  asleep,  lying  there  with  my  
mother's  things,  with  the  air  making  moisture  on  my 
chest and the sky puckering with light. 

i  woke  to  the  sound  of  someone  thrashing 
through the trees. t. ray! i sat up, panicked, buttoning 
my shirt. i heard his footsteps, the fast, heavy pant of his 
breathing. looking down, i saw my mother's gloves and 
the two pictures. i stopped buttoning and grabbed them 
up, fumbling with them, unable to think what to do, how 
to hide them. i had dropped the tin box back in its hole, 
too far away to reach. 

"lileeee!"  he  shouted,  and  i  saw  his  shadow 

plunge toward me across the ground. 

i  jammed  the  gloves  and  pictures  under  the 
waistband of my shorts, then reached for the rest of the 
buttons with shaking fingers. 

before i could fasten them, light poured down on 
me and there he was without a shirt, holding a flashlight. 
the beam swept and zagged, blinding me when it swung 
across my eyes. 

"who  were  you  out  here  with?"  he  shouted, 

aiming the light on my half-buttoned top. 

 

39 

"n-no  one,"  i  said,  gathering  my  knees  in  my 
arms,  startled  by  what  he  was  thinking.  i  couldn't  look  
long  at  his  face,  how  large  and  blazing  it  was,  like  the  
face of god. 

he  flung  the  beam  of  light  into  the  darkness. 

"who's out there?" he yelled. 

"please, t. ray, no one was here but me." 
"get up from there," he yelled. 
i followed him back to the house. his feet struck 
the  ground  so  hard  i  felt  sorry  for  the  black  earth.  he  
didn't  speak  till  we  reached  the  kitchen  and  he  pulled 
the martha white grits from the pantry. 

"i expect this out of boys, lily—you can't blame 
them—but i expect more out of you. you act no better 
than a slut." 

he poured a mound of grits the size of an anthill 

onto the pine floor. "get over here and kneel down." 

i'd been kneeling on grits since i was six, but still i 
never  got  used  to that powdered-glass feeling  beneath 
my skin. i walked toward them with those tiny feather 
steps you expect of a girl in japan, and lowered myself 
to  the  floor,  determined  not  to  cry,  but  the  sting  was  
already gathering in my eyes. 

t. ray sat in a chair and cleaned his nails with a 
pocketknife.  i  swayed  from  knee  to  knee,  hoping  for  a 
second or two of relief, but the pain cut deep into my 

 

40 

skin.  i  bit  down  on  my  lip,  and  it  was  then  i  felt  the  
wooden  picture  of  black  mary  underneath  my 
waistband.  i  felt  the  waxed  paper  with  my  mother's 
picture  inside  and  her  gloves  stuck  to  my  belly,  and  it 
seemed  all  of  a  sudden  like  my  mother  was  there,  up  
against  my  body,  like  she  was  bits  and  pieces  of 
insulation molded against my skin, helping me absorb all 
his meanness. 

• • • 
the  next  morning  i  woke  up  late.  the  moment 
my feet touched the floor, i checked under my mattress 
where i'd tucked my mother's things—just a temporary 
hiding place till i could bury them back in the orchard. 

satisfied  they  were  safe,  i  strolled  into  the 
kitchen,  where  i  found  rosaleen  sweeping  up  grits.  i 
buttered  a  piece  of  sunbeam  bread.  she  jerked  the 
broom as she swept, raising a wind. "what happened?" 
she said. 

"i  went  out  to  the  orchard  last  night.  t.  ray  

thinks i met some boy." 

"did you?" 
i rolled my eyes at her. "no." 
"how long did he keep you on these grits?" 
i shrugged. "maybe an hour." 
she  looked  down  at  my  knees  and  stopped 
sweeping.  they  were  swollen  with  hundreds  of  red 

 

41 

welts,  pinprick  bruises  that  would  grow  into  a  blue 
stubble across my skin. 

"look at you, child. look what he's done to you," 

she said. 

my  knees  had  been  tortured  like  this  enough 
times in my life that i'd stopped thinking of it as out of 
the  ordinary;  it  was  just  something  you  had  to  put  up 
with  from  time  to  time,  like  the  common  cold.  but  
suddenly  the  look  on  rosaleen's  face  cut  through  all 
that. look what he's done to you. 

that's what i was doing—taking a good long look 
at  my  knees—when  t.  ray  stomped  through  the  back 
door. 

"well,  look  who  decided to  get  up."  he  yanked 
the bread out of my hands and threw it into snout's food 
bowl. 

"would it be too much to ask you to get out to 
the peach stand and do some work? you're not queen 
for a day, you know." 

this will sound crazy, but up until then i thought 
t. ray probably loved me some. i could never forget the 
time he smiled at me in church when i was singing with 
the hymnbook upside down. 

now i looked at his face. it was despising and full 

of anger. 

 

42 

"as long as you live under my roof, you'll do what 

i say!" he shouted. 

then i'll find another roof, i thought. 
"you understand me?" he said. 
"yes,  sir,  i  understand,"  i  said,  and  i  did,  too.  i 
understood  that  a  new  rooftop  would  do  wonders  for 
me. 

• • • 
late  that  afternoon  i  caught  two  more  bees.  
lying  on  my  stomach  across  the  bed,  i  watched  how 
they orbited the space in the jar, around and around like 
they'd missed the exit. 

rosaleen  poked  her  head  in  the  door.  "you  all 

right?" 

"yeah, i'm fine." 
"i'm leaving  now.  you tell  your  daddy  i'm  going 

into town tomorrow instead of coming here." 

"you're going to town? take me," i said. 
"why do you wanna go?" 
"please, rosaleen." 
"you're gonna have to walk the whole way." 
"i don't care." 
"ain't  nothing  much  gonna  be  open  but 

firecracker stands and the grocery store." 

"i  don't  care.  i just wanna  get  out  of  the house 

some on my birthday." 

 

43 

rosaleen  stared  at  me,  sagged  low  on  her  big  
ankles. "all right, but you ask your daddy. i'll be by here 
first thing in the morning." 

she  was  out  the  door.  i  called  after  her.  "how  

come you're going to town?" 

she  stayed  with  her  back  to  me  a  moment,  

unmoving. 

when  she  turned,  her  face  looked  soft  and 
changed, like a different rosaleen. her hand dipped into 
her  pocket,  where  her  fingers  crawled  around  for 
something.  she  drew  out  a  folded  piece  of  notebook 
paper  and came to  sit  beside  me on the  bed.  i rubbed 
my knees while she smoothed out the paper across her 
lap. 

her  name,  rosaleen  daise,  was  written  twenty-
five  times  at  least  down  the  page  in  large,  careful  
cursive,  like  the  first  paper  you  turn  in  when  school 
starts.  "this  is  my  practice  sheet,"  she  said.  "for  the 
fourth  of  july  they're  holding  a  voters"  rally  at  the 
colored church. i'm registering myself to vote." 

an  uneasy  feeling  settled  in  my  stomach.  last 
night  the  television  had  said  a  man  in  mississippi  was 
killed for registering to vote, and i myself had overheard 
mr. bussey, one of the deacons, say to t. ray, "don't you 
worry,  they're  gonna  make  "em  write  their  names  in 

 

44 

perfect cursive and refuse them a card if they forget so 
much as to dot an i or make a loop in their y." 

i studied the curves of rosaleen's r. "does t. ray 

know what you're doing?" 

"t. ray," she said. "t. ray don't know nothing." 
• • • 
at  sunset  he  shuffled  up,  sweaty  from  work.  i 
met him at the kitchen door, my arms folded across the 
front  of  my  blouse.  "i  thought  i'd  walk  to  town  with 
rosaleen  tomorrow.  i  need  to  buy  some  sanitary 
supplies." 

he accepted this without comment. t. ray hated 

female puberty worse than anything. 

that  night  i  looked  at  the  jar  of  bees  on  my  
dresser.  the  poor  creatures  perched  on  the  bottom 
barely  moving,  obviously  pining  away  for  flight.  i 
remembered  then  the  way  they'd  slipped  from  the 
cracks  in  my  walls  and  flown  for  the  sheer  joy  of  it.  i  
thought  about  the  way  my  mother  had  built  trails  of 
graham-cracker  crumbs  and  marshmallow  to 
lure 
roaches  from  the  house  rather  than  step  on  them.  i  
doubted she would've approved of keeping bees in a jar. 
i unscrewed the lid and set it aside. 

"you can go," i said. 
but  the  bees  remained  there,  like  planes  on  a 
runway  not  knowing  they'd  been  cleared  for  takeoff. 

 

45 

they  crawled  on  their  stalk  legs  around  the  curved 
perimeters of the glass as if the world had shrunk to that 
jar. i tapped the glass, even laid the jar on its side, but 
those crazy bees stayed put. 

• • • 
the  bees  were  still  in  there  the  next  morning 
when  rosaleen  showed  up.  she  was  bearing  an  angel 
food cake with fourteen candles. 

"here you go. happy birthday," she said. we sat 
down and ate two slices each with glasses of milk. the 
milk left a moon crescent on the darkness of her upper 
lip, which she didn't bother to wipe away. later i would 
remember that, how she set out, a marked woman from 
the beginning. 

sylvan  was  miles  away.  we  walked  along  the 
ledge of the highway, rosaleen moving at the pace of a 
bank-vault  door,  her  spit  jug  fastened  on  her  finger. 
haze hung under the trees, and every inch of air smelled 
overripe with peaches. 

"you limping?" rosaleen said. 
my  knees  were  aching  to  the  point  that  i  was  

struggling to keep up with her. "a little." 

"well, why don't we sit down on the side of the 

road awhile?" she said. 

"that's okay," i told her. "i'll be fine." 

 

46 

a car swept by, slinging scalded air and a layer of 
dust. rosaleen was slick with heat. she mopped her face 
and breathed hard. 

we  were  coming  to  ebenezer  baptist  church, 
where t. ray and i attended. the steeple jutted through 
a  cluster  of  shade  trees;  below,  the  red  bricks  looked 
shadowy and cool. 

"come on," i said, turning in the drive. 
"where're you going?" 
"we can rest in the church." 
the air inside was dim and still, slanted with light 
from  the  side  windows,  not  those  pretty  stained-glass 
windows but milky panes you can't really see through. 

i led  us  down front and  sat in the  second  pew, 
leaving room for rosaleen. she plucked a paper fan from 
the  hymnbook  holder  and  studied  the  picture  on  it—a 
white  church with  a smiling white lady coming  out  the 
door. 

rosaleen fanned and i listened to little jets of air 
come off  her  hands.  she  never went to church herself, 
but  on  those  few  times  t.  ray  had  let  me  walk  to  her  
house back in the woods, i'd seen her special shelf with 
a  stub  of  candle,  creek  rocks,  a  reddish  feather,  and  a 
piece of john the conqueror root, and right in the center 
a picture of a woman, propped up without a frame. 

 

47 

the first time i saw it, i'd asked rosaleen, "is that 
you?" since i swear the woman looked exactly like her, 
with  woolly  braids,  blue-black  skin,  narrow  eyes,  and 
most  of  her  concentrated  in  her  lower  portion,  like  an 
eggplant. 

"this is my mama," she said. 
the finish was rubbed off the sides of the picture 
where her thumbs had held it. her shelf had to do with a 
religion she'd made  up for herself, a  mixture of  nature 
and ancestor worship. she'd stopped going to the house 
of prayer full gospel holiness church years ago because 
it started at ten in the morning and didn't end till three 
in the afternoon, which is enough religion to kill a full-
grown person, she'd said. 

t. ray said rosaleen's religion was plain wacko, 
and  for  me  to  stay  out  of  it.  but  it  drew  me  to  her  to  
think  she  loved  water  rocks  and  woodpecker  feathers, 
that she had a single picture of her mother just like i did. 
one  of  the  church  doors  opened  and  brother 

gerald, our minister, stepped into the sanctuary. 

"well,  for  goodness"  sake,  lily,  what  are  you 

doing here?" 

then  he  saw  rosaleen  and  started  to  rub  the 
bald space on his head with such agitation i thought he 
might rub down to the skull bone. 

 

48 

"we  were  walking  to  town  and  stopped  in  to  

cool off." 

his  mouth  formed  the word  "oh,"  but he didn't 
actually say it; he was too busy looking at rosaleen in his 
church,  rosaleen  who  chose  this  moment  to  spit  into 
her snuff jug. 

it's funny how you forget the rules. she was not 
supposed  to  be  inside  here.  every  time  a  rumor  got  
going about a group of negroes coming to worship with 
us  on  sunday morning, the deacons  stood  locked-arms 
across  the  church  steps  to  turn  them  away.  we  loved  
them in the lord, brother gerald said, but they had their 
own places. 

"today's my birthday," i said, hoping to send his 

thoughts in a new direction. 

"is it? well, happy birthday, lily. so how old are 

you now?" 

"fourteen." 
"ask him if we  can have a couple of  these fans 

for your birthday present," said rosaleen. 

he made a thin sound, intended for a laugh. 
"now,  if  we  let  everybody  borrow  a  fan  that  

wanted one, the church wouldn't have a fan left." 

"she  was  just  kidding,"  i said,  and  stood  up.  he 
smiled,  satisfied,  and  walked  beside  me  all  the  way  to 
the door, with rosaleen tagging behind. 

 

49 

outside,  the  sky  had  whited  over  with  clouds, 
and  shine  spilled  across  the  surfaces,  sending  motes 
before my eyes. when we'd cut through the parsonage 
yard and were back on the highway, rosaleen produced 
two church fans from the bosom of her dress, and, doing 
an impersonation of me gazing up sweet-faced, she said, 
"oh, brother gerald, she was just kidding." 

• • • 
we came into sylvan on the worst side of town. 
old houses set up on cinder blocks. fans wedged in the 
windows.  dirt  yards.  women  in  pink  curlers.  collarless 
dogs. 

after  a  few  blocks  we  approached  the  esso 
station  on  the  corner  of  west  market  and  park  street,  
generally recognized as a catchall place for men with too 
much time on their hands. 

i  noticed  that  not  a  single  car  was  getting  gas. 
three men sat in dinette chairs beside the garage with a 
piece  of  plywood  balanced  on  their  knees.  they  were 
playing cards. 

"hit me," one of them said, and the dealer, who 
wore a seed and feed cap, slapped a card down in front 
of him. he looked up and saw us, rosaleen fanning and 
shuffling, swaying side to side. "well, look what we got 
coming  here,"  he  called  out.  "where're  you  going, 
nigger?" 

 

50 

firecrackers  made  a  spattering  sound  in  the 
distance.  "keep  walking,"  i  whispered.  "don't  pay  any 
attention."  but  rosaleen,  who  had  less  sense  than  i'd 
dreamed,  said  in  this  tone  like  she  was  explaining 
something  real  hard  to  a  kindergarten  student,  "i'm 
going to register my name so i can vote, that's what." 

"we  should  hurry  on,"  i  said,  but  she  kept 

walking at her own slow pace. 

the  man  next  to  the  dealer,  with  hair  combed 
straight back, put down his cards and said, "did you hear 
that? we got ourselves a model citizen." 

i heard a slow song of wind drift ever so slightly 
in the street behind us and move along the gutter. we 
walked, and the men pushed back their makeshift table 
and came right down to the curb to wait for us, like they 
were spectators at a parade and we were the prize float. 
"did  you  ever  see  one  that  black?"  said  the 

dealer. 

and  the  man  with  his  combed-back  hair  said, 

"no, and i ain't seen one that big either." 

naturally  the  third  man  felt  obliged  to  say 
something,  so  he  looked  at  rosaleen  sashaying  along 
unperturbed,  holding  her  white-lady  fan,  and  he  said, 
"where'd you get that fan, nigger?" 

"stole it from a church," she said. just like that. 

 

51 

i  had  gone  once  in  a  raft  down  the  chattooga 
river with my church group, and the same feeling came 
to  me  now—of  being  lifted  by  currents,  by  a  swirl  of  
events i couldn't reverse. 

coming  alongside  the  men,  rosaleen  lifted  her 
snuff  jug,  which  was  filled  with  black  spit,  and  calmly 
poured it across the tops of the men's shoes, moving her 
hand  in  little  loops  like  she  was  writing  her  name—
rosaleen daise—just the way she'd practiced. 

for  a  second  they  stared  down  at  the  juice, 
dribbled  like  car  oil  across  their  shoes.  they  blinked, 
trying  to  make  it  register.  when  they  looked  up,  i  
watched  their  faces  go  from  surprise  to  anger,  then 
outright fury. they lunged at her, and everything started 
to spin. there was rosaleen, grabbed and thrashing side 
to side, swinging the men like pocketbooks on her arms, 
and the men yelling for her to apologize and clean their 
shoes. 

"clean  it  off!"  that's  all  i  could  hear,  over  and  
over.  and  then  the  cry  of  birds  overhead,  sharp  as 
needles, sweeping from lowbough trees, stirring up the 
scent of pine, and even then i knew i would recoil all my 
life from the smell of it. 

"call  the  police,"  yelled  the  dealer  to  a  man 

inside. 

 

52 

by  then  rosaleen  lay  sprawled  on  the  ground, 
pinned,  twisting  her  fingers  around  clumps  of  grass. 
blood ran from a cut  beneath  her eye.  it curved under 
her chin the way tears do. 

when the  policeman  got  there,  he said  we  had 

to get into the back of his car. 

"you're under arrest," he told rosaleen. "assault, 
theft,  and  disturbing  the  peace."  then  he  said  to  me, 
"when  we  get  down  to  the station, i'll  call  your  daddy 
and let him deal with you." 

rosaleen  climbed  in,  sliding  over  on  the  seat.  i 

moved after her, sliding as she slid, sitting as she sat. 

the door closed. so quiet it amounted to nothing 
but a snap of air, and that was the strangeness of it, how 
a small sound like that could fall across the whole world. 
 

 

 

53 

chapter two 

on leaving the old nest, the swarm normally 
flies  only  a  few  metres  and  settles.  scout  bees 
look for a suitable place to start the new colony. 
eventually, one location wins favor and the  whole 
swarm takes to the air. 

—bees of the world 
 
the policeman driving us to jail was mr. avery 
gaston, but the men at the esso station called him shoe. 
a puzzling nickname since there was nothing remarkable 
about his shoes, or even his feet so  far as i could see. 
the one thing about him was the smallness of his ears, 
the ears of a child, ears like little dried apricots. i fixed 
my eyes on them from the backseat and wondered why 
he wasn't called ears. 

the  three  men  followed  us  in  a  green  pickup 
with a gun rack inside. they drove close to our bumper 
and  blew  the  horn  every  few  seconds.  i  jumped  each 
time,  and  rosaleen  gave  my  leg  a  pat.  in  front  of  the  

 

54 

western  auto  the  men  started  a  game  of  pulling 
alongside us and yelling things out the window, mostly 
things we couldn't make out because our windows were 
rolled  up.  people  in  the  back  of  police  cars  were  not  
given  the  benefit  of  door  handles  or  window  cranks,  i 
noticed, so we were blessed to be chauffeured to jail in 
smothering  heat,  watching  the  men  mouth  things  we 
were glad not to know. 

rosaleen  looked  straight  ahead  and  acted  as  if 
the  men  were  insignificant  houseflies  buzzing  at  our 
screen door. i was the only one who could feel the way 
her thighs trembled, the whole back seat like a vibrating 
bed. 

"mr.  gaston,"  i  said,  "those  men  aren't  coming 

with us, are they?" 

his  smile  appeared  in  the  rearview  mirror.  "i 

can't say what men riled up like that will do." 

before main street they tired of the amusement 
and sped off. i breathed easier, but when we pulled into 
the  empty  lot  behind  the  police  station,  they  were 
waiting on the back steps. the dealer tapped a flashlight 
against  the  palm  of  his  hand.  the  other  two  held  our 
church fans, waving them back and forth. 

when  we  got  out  of  the  car,  mr.  gaston  put  
handcuffs  on  rosaleen,  fastening  her  arms  behind  her 

 

55 

back. i walked so close to her i felt heat vapor trailing off 
her skin. 

she  stopped  ten  yards  short  of  the  men  and 
refused to budge. "now, look here, don't make me get 
out my gun," mr. gaston said. usually the only time the 
police in sylvan got to use their guns was when they got 
called out to shoot rattlesnakes in people's yards. 

"come on, rosaleen," i said. "what can they do 

to you with a policeman right here?" 

that  was  when  the  dealer  lifted  the  flashlight 
over  his  head,  then  down,  smashing  it  into  rosaleen's 
forehead. she dropped to her knees. 

i don't remember screaming, but the next thing i 
knew, mr. gaston had his hand clamped over my mouth. 
"hush," he said. 

"maybe  now  you  feel  like  apologizing,"  the 
dealer  said.  rosaleen  tried  to  get  to  her  feet,  but 
without her hands it was hopeless. it took me and mr. 
gaston both to pull her up. 

"your  black  ass  is  gonna  apologize  one  way  or 
another,"  the  dealer  said,  and  he  stepped  toward 
rosaleen. 

"hold on now, franklin," said mr. gaston, moving 

us toward the door. "now's not the time." 
"i'm not resting till she apologizes." 

 

56 

that's  the  last  i  heard  him  yell  before  we  got  
inside,  where  i  had  an  overpowering  impulse  to  kneel 
down and kiss the jail house floor. 

• • • 
the only image i had for jails was from westerns 
at  the  movies,  and  this  one  was  nothing  like  that.  for  
one  thing,  it  was  painted  pink  and  had  flower-print 
curtains in the window. 

it  turned  out  we'd  come  in  through  the  jailer's 
living  quarters.  his  wife  stepped  in  from  the  kitchen, 
greasing a muffin tin. 

"got you two more mouths to feed," mr. gaston 
said,  and  she  went  back  to  work  without  a  smile  of 
sympathy. 

he led us around to the front, where there were 
two  rows  of  jail  cells,  all  of  them  empty.  mr.  gaston  
removed rosaleen's handcuffs and handed her a towel 
from  the  bathroom.  she  pressed  it  against  her  head 
while he filled out papers at a desk, followed by a period 
of poking around for keys in a file drawer. 

the  jail  cells  smelled  with  the  breath  of  drunk 
people. he put us in the first cell on the first row, where 
somebody had scratched the words "shit throne" across 
a  bench  attached  to  one  wall.  nothing  seemed  quite 
real. we're in jail, i thought. we're in jail. 

 

57 

when rosaleen pulled back the towel, i saw an 
inch-long  gash  across  a  puffy  place  high  over  her 
eyebrow. "is it hurting bad?" i asked. 

"some,"  she  said.  she  circled  the  cell  two  or  

three times before sinking down onto the bench. 

"t. ray will get us out," i said. 
"uh-huh." 
she  didn't  speak  another  word  till  mr.  gaston 
opened the cell door about a half hour later. "come on," 
he  said.  rosaleen  looked  hopeful  for  a  moment.  she 
actually  started  to  lift  herself  up.  he  shook  his  head. 
"you ain't going anywhere. just the girl." 

at the door i held on to a cell bar like it was the 
long bone in rosaleen's arm. "i'll be back. all right?… all 
right, rosaleen?" 

"you go on, i'll manage." 
the caved-in look of her face nearly did me in. 
• • • 
the  speedometer  needle  on  t.  ray's  truck 
wiggled so badly i couldn't make out whether it pointed 
to seventy or eighty. leaning into the steering wheel, he 
jammed  his  foot  onto  the  accelerator,  let  off,  then 
jammed it again. the poor truck was rattling to the point 
i expected the hood to fly off and decapitate a couple of 
pine trees. 

 

58 

i  imagined  that  t.  ray  was  rushing  home  so  he  
could start right away constructing pyramids of grits all 
through the house—a torture chamber of food staples, 
where i would go from one pile to the next, kneeling for 
hours on end with nothing but bathroom breaks. i didn't 
care.  i  couldn't  think  of  anything  but  rosaleen  back 
there in jail. 

i  squinted  at  him  sideways.  "what  about 

rosaleen? you have to get her out—" 

"you're lucky i got you out!" he yelled. 
"but she can't stay there—" 
"she  dumped  snuff  juice  on  three  white  men! 
what the hell was she thinking? and on franklin posey, 
for  christ's  sake.  she  couldn't  pick  somebody  normal? 
he's the meanest nigger-hater in sylvan. he'd as soon kill 
her as look at her." 

"but  not  really,"  i  said.  "you  don't  mean  he 

would really kill her." 

"what  i  mean  is,  i  wouldn't  be  surprised  if  he 

flat-out killed her." 

my arms felt weak in their sockets. 
franklin  posey was  the man  with  the flashlight, 
and  he  was  gonna  kill  rosaleen.  but  then,  hadn't  i 
known this inside even before t. ray ever said it? 

 

59 

he  followed  me  up  the  stairs.  i  moved  with  
deliberate slowness, anger suddenly building in me. how 
could he leave rosaleen in jail like that? 

as i stepped inside  my room, he stopped at the 
doorway. "i have to go settle the payroll for the pickers," 
he said. "don't you leave this room. you understand me? 
you  sit  here  and  think  about  me  coming  back  and 
dealing with you. think about it real hard." 

"you  don't  scare  me,"  i  said,  mostly  under  my  

breath. 

he'd already turned to leave, but now he whirled 

back. "what did you say?" 

"you  don't  scare  me,"  i  repeated,  louder  this 
time. a brazen feeling had broken loose in me, a daring 
something that had been locked up in my chest. 

he  stepped  toward  me,  raising  the  back  of  his 
hand like  he  might  bring  it  down  across my  face.  "you 
better watch your mouth." 

"go ahead, try and hit me!" i yelled. 
when he swung, i turned my face. it was a clean 
miss. i  ran for  the  bed and  scrambled onto  the  middle 
oit, breathing hard. "my mother will never let you touch 
me again!" i shouted. 

"your  mother?"  his  face  was  bright  red.  "you 

think that god damn woman gave a shit about you?" 

"my mother loved me!" i cried. 

60 

 

he  threw  back  his  head  and  let  out  a  forced, 

bitter laugh. 

"it's—it's not funny," i said. 
he lunged toward the bed then, pressing his fists 
into the mattress, bringing his face so close i could see 
the tiny holes where his whiskers grew. i slid backward, 
toward the pillows, shoving my back into the headboard. 
"not funny?" he yelled. "not funny? why, it's the 
funniest goddamn thing i ever heard: you thinking your 
mother is your guardian angel." he laughed again. "the 
woman could have cared less about you." 
"that's not true," i said. "it's not." 
"and how would you know?" he said, still leaning 

toward me. 

a leftover smile pulled the corners of his mouth. 
"i hate you!" i screamed. 
that  stopped  his  smiling  instantly.  he stiffened. 
"why, you little bitch," he said. the color faded from his 
lips. 

suddenly 

i 

if  something 
dangerous  had  slipped  into  the  room.  i  looked  toward 
the window and felt a tremor slide along my spine. 

ice  cold,  as 

felt 

"you listen to me," he said, his voice deadly calm. 
"the truth is, your sorry mother ran off and left you. the 
day she died, she'd  come back to get her things, that's 

 

61 

all. you can hate me all you want, but she's the one who 
left you." 

the room turned absolutely silent. 
he brushed at something on his shirtfront, then 

walked to the door. 

after  he  left,  i  didn't  move  except  to  trace  the 
bars of light on the bed with my finger. the sound of his 
boots banging down the stairs drifted away, and i took 
the pillows from underneath the bedspread and placed 
them  around  me  like  i  was  making  an  inner  tube  that 
might  keep  me  afloat.  i  could  understand  her  leaving 
him. but leaving me? this would sink me forever. 

the bee jar sat on the bedside table, empty now. 
sometime since this morning the bees had finally gotten 
around  to flying  off.  i reached  over  and took  the  jar in 
my hands,  and  out  came  the tears  i'd  been  holding on 
to, it seemed like for years. 

your sorry mother ran off  and left  you. the  day 

she died, she'd come back to get her things, that's all. 

god and jesus, you make him take it back. 
the  memory  settled  over  me.  the  suitcase  on 
the floor. the way they'd fought. my shoulders began to 
shake  in  a  strange,  controllable  way.  i  held  the  jar  
pressed  between  my  breasts,  hoping  it  would  steady 
me, but i couldn't stop shaking, couldn't stop crying, and 
it  frightened  me,  as  though  i'd  been  struck  by  a  car  i  

 

62 

hadn't  seen  coming  and  was  lying  on  the  side  of  the 
road, trying to understand what had happened. 

i sat on the edge of the bed, replaying his words 
over  and  over.  each  time  there  was  a  wrench  in  what 
felt like my heart. 

i don't know how long i sat there feeling broken 
to pieces. i walked to the window and gazed out at the 
peach  trees  stretching  halfway  to  north  carolina,  the 
way  they  held  up  their  leafy  arms  in  gestures  of  pure  
beseeching. the rest was sky and air and lonely space. 

i looked down at the bee jar still clutched in my 
hand  and  saw  a  teaspoon  of  teardrops  floating  in  the 
bottom. i unfastened the window screen and poured it 
out. the wind lifted it on her skirt tails and shook it over 
the blistered grass. how could she have left me? i stood 
there several minutes looking out on the world, trying to 
understand. little birds were singing, so perfect. 

that's  when  it  came  to  me:  what if  my mother 
leaving  wasn't  true?  what  if  t.  ray  had  made  it  up  to 
punish me? 

i  felt  almost  dizzy  with  relief.  that  was  it.  that  
had to be it. i mean, my father was thomas edison when 
it  came  to  inventing  punishments.  once  after  i'd  back-
talked him, he'd told me my rabbit, mademoiselle, had 
died, and i'd cried all  night before i discovered her the 
next morning healthy as anything in her pen. he had to 

 

63 

be making this up, too. some things were not possible in 
this  world.  children  did  not  have  two  parents  who 
refused  to  love  them.  one,  maybe,  but  for  pity's  sake, 
not two. 

it  had  to  be  like  he'd  said  before:  she  was 
cleaning  out  the  closet  the  day  of  the  accident.  people 
cleaned out closets all the time. 

i took a breath to steady myself. 
you  could  say  i'd  never  had  a  true  religious 
moment,  the  kind  where  you  know  yourself  spoken  to 
by a voice that seems other than yourself, spoken to so 
genuinely  you  see  the  words  shining  on  trees  and 
clouds. but i had such a moment right then, standing in 
my own ordinary room. i heard a voice say, lily melissa 
owens, your jar is open. 

in a matter of seconds i knew exactly what i had 
to  do—leave.  i  had  to  get  away  from  t.  ray,  who  was  
probably on his way back this minute to do lord-knows-
what to me. not to mention i had to get rosaleen out of 
jail. 

the clock read 2:40. i needed a solid plan, but i 
didn't have the luxury of sitting down to think one up. i 
grabbed my pink canvas duffel bag, the one i'd planned 
to  use  for  overnights  the  minute  anyone  asked  me.  i  
took  the  thirty-eight  dollars  i'd  earned  selling  peaches 
and stuffed it into the bag with  my seven best  pairs of 

 

64 

panties, the ones that had the days of the week printed 
across  the  backside.  i  dumped  in  socks,  five  pairs  of  
shorts, tops, a night gown, shampoo, brush, toothpaste, 
toothbrush,  rubber  bands  for  my  hair,  all  the  time 
watching the window. what else? catching sight of the 
map  tacked  on  the  wall,  i  snatched  it  down,  not 
bothering to pry out the tacks. 

i reached under the mattress and pulled out my 
mother's picture, the gloves, and the wooden picture of 
black mary, and tucked them down in the bag, too. 

tearing a sheet of paper from last year's english 
notebook, i wrote a note, short and to the point: "dear 
t. ray, don't bother looking for me. lily. p.s. people who 
tell lies like you should rot in hell." 

when i checked the window, t. ray was coming 
out of the orchard toward the house, fists balled, head 
plowed forward like a bull wanting to gore something. 

i  propped  the  note  on  my  dresser  and  stood  a 
moment in the center of the room, wondering if i'd ever 
see it again. "goodbye," i said, and there was a tiny sprig 
of sadness pushing up from my heart. 

outside, 

i  spied  the  broken  space 

in  the 
latticework that wrapped around the foundation of the 
house. squeezing through, i disappeared into violet light 
and cobwebbed air. 

t. ray's boots stomped across the porch. 

65 

 

"lily!  li-leeeee!"  i  heard  his  voice  sailing  along 

the floorboards of the house. 

all of a sudden i caught sight of snout sniffing at 
the  spot  where  i'd  crawled  through.  i  backed  deeper 
into the darkness, but she'd caught my scent and started 
barking her mangy head off. 

t.  ray  emerged  with  my  note  crumpled  in  his 
hand, yelled at snout to shut the hell up, and tore out in 
his  truck,  leaving  plumes  of  exhaust  all  along  the 
driveway. 

• • • 
walking  along  the  weedy  strip  beside  the 
highway  for  the  second  time  that  day,  i  was  thinking 
how much older fourteen had made me. in the space of 
a few hours i'd become forty years old. 

the  road  stretched  empty  as  far  as  i  could  see,  
with heat shimmer making the air seem wavy in places. 
if i managed to get rosaleen free—an "if" so big it could 
have  been  the  planet  jupiter—just  where  did  i  think 
we'd go? 

suddenly i stood still. tiburon, south carolina. of 
course. the town written on the back of the black mary 
picture. hadn't i been planning to go there one of these 
days? it made such perfect sense: my mother had been 
there.  or  else  she  knew  people  there  who'd  cared 

 

66 

enough to send her a nice picture of jesus' mother. and 
who would ever think to look for us there? 

i  squatted  beside  the  ditch  and  unfolded  the 
map. tiburon was a pencil dot beside the big red star of 
columbia.  t.  ray  would  check  the  bus  station,  so 
rosaleen and i would have to hitchhike. how hard could 
that  be?  you  stand  there  with  your  thumb  out  and  a 
person takes pity on you. 

a short distance past the church, brother gerald 
whizzed  by  in  his  white  ford.  i  saw  his  brake  lights 
flicker. he backed up. "i thought that was you," he said 
through the window. 

"where're you headed?" 
"town." 
"again? what's the bag for?" 
"i'm… i'm taking some things to rosaleen. she's 

in jail." 

"yeah,  i  know,"  he  said,  flinging  open  the 

passenger door. 

"get in, i'm heading there myself." 
i'd never been inside a preacher's car before. it's 
not  that  i  expected  a  ton  of  bibles  stacked  on  the 
backseat, but i was surprised to see that, inside, it was 
like anybody else's car. 

"you're going to see rosaleen?" i said. 

 

67 

"the police called and asked me to press charges 
against  her  for  stealing  church  property.  they  say  she 
took some of our fans. you know anything about that?" 

"it was only two fans—" 
he jumped straight into his pulpit  voice. "in the 
eyes of god  it doesn't matter whether it's two fans  or 
two hundred. stealing is stealing. she asked if she could 
take the fans, i said no, in plain english. she took them 
anyway. now that's sin, lily." 

pious people have always gotten on my nerves. 
"but  she's  deaf  in  one  ear,"  i  said.  "i  think  she  
just mixed up what you said. she's always doing that. t. 
ray will tell her, "iron my two shirts," and she'll iron the 
blue shirts." 

"a hearing problem. well, i didn't know that," he 

said. 

"rosaleen would never steal a thing." 
"they said she'd assaulted some men at the esso 

station." 

"it wasn't like that," i said. "see, she was singing 
her favorite hymn, "were you there when they crucified 
my  lord?"'  i  don't  believe  those  men  are  christians, 
brother  gerald,  because  they  yelled  at  her  to  shut  up 
with that blankety-blank jesus tune. rosaleen said, "you 
can curse me, but don't blaspheme the lord jesus." 

 

68 

but  they  kept  right  on.  so  she  poured  the  juice 
from  her  snuff  cup  on  their  shoes.  maybe  she  was 
wrong, but in her mind she was standing up for jesus." i 
was sweating through my top and all along the backs of 
my thighs. 

brother gerald dragged his teeth back and forth 
across his lip. i could tell he was actually weighing what 
i'd said. 

mr.  gaston  was  in  the  station  alone,  eating 
boiled  peanuts  at  his  desk,  when  brother  gerald  and  i 
came through the door. being the sort of person he was, 
mr. gaston had shells all over the floor. 

"your  colored  woman  ain't  here,"  he  said, 
looking  at  me.  "i  took  her  to  the  hospital  for  stitches.  
she took a fall and hit her head." 

took  a  fall,  my  rear  end.  i  wanted  to  throw  his  

boiled peanuts against the wall. 

i  could  not  keep  myself  from  shouting  at  him. 

"what do you mean, she fell and hit her head?" 

mr.  gaston looked over  at brother gerald, that 
all-knowing  look  men  give  each  other  when  a  female 
acts the least bit hysterical. 

"settle down, now," he said to me. 
"i can't settle down till i know if she's all right," i 

said, my voice calmer but still shaking a little. 

 

69 

"she's fine. it's only a  little concussion. i expect 
she'll be back here later this evening. the doctor wanted 
her watched for a few hours." 

while  brother  gerald  was  explaining  how  he 
couldn't sign the warrant papers seeing as how rosaleen 
was nearly deaf, i started for the door. 

mr.  gaston  shot  me  a  warning  look.  "we  got  a  
guard  on  her  at  the  hospital,  and  he's  not  letting 
anybody  see  her,  so  you  go  on  back  home.  you 
understand?" 

"yes, sir. i'm going home." 
"you  do  that,"  he  said.  "'cause  if  i  hear  you've 
been anywhere near that hospital, i'm calling your daddy 
again." 

• • • 
sylvan  memorial  hospital  was  a 

low  brick 

building with one wing for whites and one for blacks. 

i  stepped  into  a  deserted  corridor  clogged  with 
too  many  smells.  carnations,  old  people,  rubbing 
alcohol,  bathroom  deodorizer, 
jell-o.  air 
conditioners poked out from the windows in the white 
section,  but  back  here  there  was  nothing  but  electric 
fans moving the hot air from one place to another. 

red 

at the nurses' station a policeman leaned on the 
desk. he  looked like somebody just out of  high school, 

 

70 

who'd  flunked  pe  and  hung  out  with  the  shop  boys 
smoking at recess. 

he was talking to a girl in white. a nurse, i guess, 
but she didn't look much older than i was. "i get off at 
six  o'clock,"  i  heard  him  say.  she  stood  there  smiling, 
tucking a piece of hair behind her ear. 

at  the  opposite  end  of  the  hall  an  empty  chair 
sat outside one of the rooms. it had a  policeman's hat 
underneath it. i hurried down there to find a sign on the 
door. "no visitors. i went right in. 

there  were  six  beds,  all  empty,  except  the 
farthest  one  over  by  the  window.  the  sheets  rose  up, 
trying hard to accommodate the occupant. i plopped my 
bag on the floor. "rosaleen?" 

a gauze bandage the size of a baby's diaper was 
wrapped around  her head,  and  her  wrists  were  tied  to 
the  bed  railing.  when  she  saw  me  standing  there,  she 
started to cry. in all the years she'd looked after me, i'd 
never  seen  a  tear  cross  her face.  now  the levee  broke 
wide  open.  i  patted  her  arm,  her  leg,  her  cheek,  her 
hand. 

when  her  tear  glands  were  finally  exhausted,  i 

said, "what happened to you?" 

"after  you  left,  that  policeman  called  shoe  let 

those men come in for their apology." 

"they hit you again?" 
71 

 

"two  of  them  held  me  by  the  arms  while  the  
other one hit me—the one with the flashlight. he said, 
"nigger, you say you're sorry." when i didn't, he came at 
me. he hit me till the policeman said that was enough. 
they didn't get no apology, though." 

i wanted those men to die in hell begging for ice 
water, but i felt mad at rosaleen, too. why couldn't you 
just  apologize?  then  maybe  franklin  posey  would  let 
you off with just a beating. all she'd done was guarantee 
they'd come back. 

"you've  got  to  get  out  of  here,"  i  said,  untying 

her wrists. 

"i can't just leave," she said. "i'm still in jail." 
"if  you  stay  here,  those  men  are  gonna  come  
back and kill you i'm serious. they're gonna kill you, like 
those  colored  people  in  mississippi  got  killed.  even  t. 
ray said so." 

when she sat up, the hospital gown rode up her 
thighs. she tugged it toward her knees, but it slid right 
back like a piece of elastic. i found her dress in the closet 
and handed it to her. 

"this is crazy—" she said. 
"put on the dress. just do it, all right?" 
she pulled it over her head and stood there with 

the bandage sloped over her forehead. 

 

72 

"that bandage has got to go," i said. i eased it off 
to find two rows of catgut stitches. then, signaling her to 
be quiet, i cracked the door to see if the policeman was 
back at his chair. 

he was. naturally it was too much to hope he'd 
stay off flirting long enough for us to float out of here. i 
stood there a couple of minutes, trying to think up some 
kind of scheme, then opened my bag, dug into my peach 
money, and took out a couple of dimes. "i'm gonna try 
and  get  rid  of  him.  get  in  the  bed,  in  case  he  looks  in  
here." 

she stared at me, her eyes shrunk to mere dots. 
"baby jesus," she said. when i stepped out into the hall, 
he jumped up. "you weren't supposed to be in there!" 

"don't i know it," i said. "i'm looking for my aunt. 
i could have sworn they told me room one-oh-two, but 
there's  a  colored  woman  in  there."  i  shook  my  head, 
trying to look confused. 

"you're lost, all right. you need to go to the other 

side of the building. you're in the colored section." 

i smiled at him. "oh." 
over on the white side of the hospital i found a 
pay  phone  next  to  a  waiting  area.  i  got  the  hospital 
number from information and dialed it up, asking for the 
nurses' station in the colored wing. 

 

73 

i cleared my throat. "this is the jailer's wife over 
at  the  police  station,"  i  said  to  the  girl  who  answered. 
"mr.  gaston  wants  you  to  send  the  policeman  that 
we've got over there back to the station. 

tell  him  the  preacher  is  on  his  way  in  to  sign 
some  papers,  and  mr.  gaston  can't  be  here  "cause  he 
had to leave just now. so if you could tell him to get over 
here right away…" 

part  of  me  was  saying  these  actual  words,  and 
part  of  me  was  listening  to  myself  say  them,  thinking 
how  i  belonged  in  a  reform  school  or  a  juvenile 
delinquent home for girls, and would probably soon be 
in one. 

she repeated it all back to me, making sure she 

had it straight. 

her sigh passed over the receiver. "i'll tell him." 
she'll tell him. i couldn't believe it. 
i  crept  back  to  the  colored  side  and  hunched 
over the water fountain as  the girl in  white relayed all 
this  to  him,  using  a  lot  of  hand  gestures.  i  watched  as  
the  policeman  put  on  his  hat  and  walked  down  the 
corridor and out the door. 

when  rosaleen  and  i stepped  from her  room,  i 
looked  left,  then  right.  we  had  to  go  past  the  nurses" 
desk  to  get  to  the  door,  but  the  girl  in  white  seemed 

 

74 

preoccupied,  sitting  with  her  head  down,  writing 
something. 

"walk like a visitor," i told rosaleen. 
halfway to the desk, the girl stopped writing and 

stood up. 

"shitbucket,"  i  said.  i  grabbed  rosaleen's  arm 

and pulled her into a patient's room. 

a  tiny  woman was perched  in  the  bed,  old  and 
birdlike,  with  a  blackberry  face.  her  mouth  opened 
when  she  saw  us,  and  her  tongue  curled  out  like  a 
misplaced  comma.  "i  need  a  little  water,"  she  said. 
rosaleen  went  over  and  poured  some  from  a  pitcher 
and  gave  the  woman  the  glass,  while  i  held  my  duffel 
bag at my chest and peeped out the door. 

i  watched  the  girl  disappear  into  a  room  a  few  
doors  down  carrying  some  sort  of  glass  bottle.  "come 
on," i said to rosaleen. 

"y'all leaving already?" said the tiny woman. 
"yeah, but i'll probably be back before the day's 
out,"  said  rosaleen,  more  for  my  benefit  than  the 
woman's. this time we didn't walk like visitors, we tore 
out of there. outside, i took rosaleen's hand and tugged 
her down the sidewalk. 

"since  you  got  everything  else  figured  out,  i  
guess you know where we're going," she said, and there 
was a tone in her voice. 

 

75 

"we're going to highway forty and thumb a ride 

to tiburon, south carolina. at least we're gonna try." 

i took us the back way, cutting through the city 
park, down a little alley to lancaster street, then three 
blocks  over  to  may  pond  road,  where  we  slipped  into 
the  vacant  lot  behind  glenn's  grocery.  we  waded 
through  queen  anne's  lace  and  thick-stalked  purple 
flowers,  into  dragonflies  and  the  smell  of  carolina 
jasmine so thick i could almost see it circling in the air 
like golden smoke. 

she didn't ask me why we were going to tiburon, 
and  i  didn't  tell  her.  what  she  did  ask  was  "when  did 
you start saying "shit bucket"?" 

i'd  never  resorted  to  bad  language,  though  i'd 
heard my share of it from t. ray or else read it in public 
restrooms.  "i'm  fourteen  now.  i  guess  i  can  say  it  if  i  
want  to."  and 
i  wanted  to,  right  that  minute. 
"shitbucket," i said. 

"shitbucket,  hellfire,  damnation,  and  son  of  a 
mother bitch," said rosaleen, laying into each word like 
it was sweet potatoes on her tongue. 

• • • 
we stood on the side of highway 41 in a patch of 
shade  provided  by  a  faded  billboard  for  lucky  strike 
cigarettes. i stuck out my thumb while every car on the 
highway sped up the second they saw us. 

 

76 

a colored man driving a beat-up chevy truck full 
of  cantaloupes  had  mercy  on  us.  i  climbed  in  first  and 
kept having to scoot over as rosaleen settled herself by 
the window. the man said he was on his way to visit his 
sister in columbia, that he was taking the cantaloupes to 
the  state  farmers'  market.  i  told  him  i  was  going  to  
tiburon to visit my aunt and rosaleen was coming to do 
housework for her. it sounded lame, but he accepted it. 
"i  can  drop  you  three  miles  from  tiburon,"  he 

said. 

sunset is the saddest light there is. 
we rode a long time in the glow of it, everything 
silent  except  for  the  crickets  and  the  frogs  who  were 
revving up for twilight. i stared through the windshield 
as the burned lights took over the sky. 

the  farmer  flicked  on  the  radio  and  the 
supremes  blared  through  the  truck  cab  with  "baby, 
baby,  where  did  our  love  go?"  there's  nothing  like  a 
song  about  lost  love  to  remind  you  how  everything 
precious can slip from the hinges where you've hung it 
so  careful.  i  laid  my  head  against  rosaleen's  arm.  i 
wanted her to pat life back into place, but her hands lay 
still  in  her  lap.  ninety  miles  after  we'd  climbed  in  his 
truck, the farmer pulled off the road beside a sign that 
read  tiburon  3  miles.  it  pointed  left,  toward  a  road 
curving  away  into  silvery  darkness.  climbing out  of  the 

 

77 

truck,  rosaleen  asked  if  we  could  have  one  of  his  
cantaloupes for our supper. 

"take yourself two," he said. 
we waited till  his  taillights turned  to  specks no 
bigger  than  lightning  bugs  before  we  spoke  or  even 
moved.  i  was  trying  not  to  think  how  sad  and  lost  we 
really  were.  i  was  not  so  sure  it  was  an  improvement 
over living with t. ray, or even life in prison. 

there  wasn't  a  soul  anywhere  to  help  us.  but 
still, i felt painfully alive, like every cell in my body had a 
little flame inside it, burning so brightly it hurt. 

"at least we got a full moon," i told rosaleen. 
we  started  walking.  if  you  think  the  country  is 
quiet, you've never lived in it. tree frogs alone make you 
wish for earplugs. we walked along, pretending it was a 
regular  day.  rosaleen  said  it  looked  like  that  farmer 
who'd  driven  us  here  had  had  a  good  crop  of 
cantaloupes.  i  said  it  was  amazing  the  mosquitoes 
weren't out. 

when  we  came  to  a  bridge  with  water  running 
beneath,  we  decided  we  would  pick  our  way  down  to 
the creek bed and rest for the night. it was a different 
universe  down  there,  the  water  shining  with  flecks  of 
moving light and kudzu vines draped between the pine 
trees like giant hammocks. it reminded me of a grimm 
brothers forest, drawing up the nervous feelings i used 

 

78 

to get when i stepped into the pages of fairy tales where 
unthinkable things were likely—you just never knew. 

rosaleen broke open the cantaloupes, pounding 
them against a creek stone. we ate them down to their 
skins, then scooped water into our hands and drank, not 
caring about algae or tadpoles or whether the cows used 
the creek for their toilet. 

then  we  sat  on  the  bank  and  looked  at  each 

other. 

"i  just  wanna  know,  of  all  the  places  on  this  
earth,  why  you  picked  tiburon,"  rosaleen  said.  "i've 
never even heard of it." 

even though it was dark, i pulled the black mary 
picture out of my bag and handed it to her. "it belonged 
to  my  mother.  on  the  back  it  says  tiburon,  south 
carolina." 

"let  me  get  this  straight.  you  picked  tiburon 
"cause your mother had a picture with that town written 
on the back—that's it?" 

"well,  think  about  it,"  i  said.  "she  must  have 
been  there  sometime  in  her  life  to  have  owned  this 
picture. and if she was, a person might remember her, 
you never know." 

rosaleen  held  it  up  to  the  moonlight  to  see  it  

better. "who's this supposed to be?" 

"the virgin mary," i said. 

 

79 

"well,  if  you  ain't  noticed,  she's  colored,"  said 
rosaleen, and i could tell it was having an effect on her 
by the way she kept gazing at it with her mouth parted. i 
could  read  her  thought:  if  jesus'  mother  is  black,  how 
come we only know about the white mary? this would 
be  like  women  finding  out  jesus  had  had  a  twin  sister 
who'd gotten half god's genes but none of the glory. 

she handed it back. "i guess i can go to my grave 

now, because i've seen it all." 

i  pushed  the  picture  down  in  my  pocket.  "you 
know  what  t.  ray  said  about  my  mother?"  i  asked, 
wanting finally to tell her what had happened. "he said 
she left me and him way before she died. that she'd just 
come  back  for  her  things  the  day  the  accident 
happened." 

i waited for rosaleen to say how ridiculous that 
was, but she squinted straight ahead as if weighing the 
possibility. 

"well,  it's  not  true,"  i  said,  my  voice  rising  like 
something had seized it from below and was shoving it 
up into my throat. 

"and if he thinks i'm going to believe that story, 
he has a hole in his so-called brain. he only made it up to 
punish me. i know he did." 

i  could  have  added  that  mothers  have  instincts 
and  hormones  that  prevent  them  leaving  their  babies, 

 

80 

that even pigs and opossums didn't leave their offspring, 
but rosaleen, having finally pondered the  matter, said, 
"you're probably right. knowing your daddy, he could do 
a thing like that." 

"and my mother could never do what he said she 

did," i added. 

"i didn't know your mama," rosaleen said. "but i 
used to see her from a distance sometimes when i came 
out  of  the  orchard  from  picking.  she'd  be  hanging 
clothes on the line or watering her plants, and you'd be 
right there beside her, playing. i only saw her one time 
when you weren't under her feet." 

i had no idea rosaleen had ever seen my mother. 
i felt suddenly light-headed, not knowing if it was from 
hunger  or  tiredness  or  this  surprising  piece  of  news. 
"what  was  she  doing  that  time  you  saw  her  alone?"  i  
asked. 

"she was out behind the tractor shed, sitting on 
the ground, staring off at nothing. when we walked by, 
she  didn't  even  notice  us.  i  remember  thinking  she 
looked a little sad." 

"well, who wouldn't be sad living with t. ray?" i 

said. 

i  saw  the  lightbulb  snap  on  in  rosaleen's  face 

then, the flash of recognition. 

 

81 

"oh,"  she  said.  "i  get  it.  you  ran  off  'cause  of  
what your daddy said about your mother. it didn't have 
nothing  to  do  with  me  in  jail.  and  here  you  got  me  
worrying  myself  sick  about  you  running  away  and 
getting  in  trouble  over  me,  and  you  would've  run  off 
anyway. well, ain't it nice of you to fill me in." 

she poked out her lip and looked up toward the 
road, making me wonder if she was about to walk back 
the way we came. "so what are you planning to do?" she 
said. "go from town to town asking people about your 
mother? is that your bright idea?" 

"if i needed somebody to criticize me around the 

clock, i could've brought t. ray along!" i shouted. 

"and for your information, i don't exactly have a 

plan." 

"well,  you  sure  had  one  back  at  the  hospital, 
coming  in  there  saying  we're  gonna  do  this  and  we're 
gonna do that, and i'm supposed to follow you like a pet 
dog. you act like you're my keeper. like i'm some dumb 
nigger you gonna save." 

her eyes were hard and narrow. 
i rose to my feet. "that's not fair!" anger sucked 

the air from my lungs. 

"you  meant  well  enough,  and  i'm  glad  to  be 
away from there, but did you think once to ask me?" she 
said. 

 

82 

"well, you are dumb!" i yelled. "you have to be 
dumb to pour your snuff juice on those men's shoes like 
that. and then dumber not to say you're sorry, if saying 
it will save your life. they were gonna come back and kill 
you, or worse. i got you out of there, and this is how you 
thank me. well, fine." 

i  stripped  off  my  keds,  grabbed  my  bag,  and 
waded  into  the  creek.  the  coldness  cut  sharp  circles 
around my calves. i didn't want to be on the same planet 
with her, much less the same side of the creek. 

"you find your own way from now on!" i yelled 

over my shoulder. 

• • • 
on the  opposite side i  plopped onto the  mossy 
dirt.  we  stared  across  the  water  at  each  other.  in  the  
dark  she  looked  like  a  boulder  shaped  by  five  hundred 
years of storms. i lay back and closed my eyes. 

in  my  dream  i  was  back  on  the  peach  farm,  
sitting out behind the tractor  shed, and even though it 
was  broad  daylight, i could see a huge, round moon in 
the  sky.  it  looked  so  perfect  up  there.  i  gazed  at  it  
awhile,  then  leaned  against  the  shed  and  closed  my 
eyes. next i heard a sound like ice breaking, and, looking 
up, i saw the moon crack apart and start to fall. i had to 
run for my life. i woke with my chest hurting. i searched 
for the moon and found it  all in one  piece, still spilling 

 

83 

light  over  the  creek.  i  looked  across  the  water  for 
rosaleen. she was gone. 

my heart did flip-flops. please, god. i didn't mean 
to treat her like a pet dog. i was trying to save her. that's 
all. 

fumbling to get my shoes on, i felt the same old 
grief  i'd  known  in  church  every  single  mother's  day. 
mother, forgive. rosaleen, where are you? i gathered up 
my  bag  and  ran  along  the  creek  toward  the  bridge, 
hardly aware i was  crying. tripping over a dead limb, i 
sprawled through the darkness and didn't bother to get 
up.  i  could  picture  rosaleen  miles  from  here,  tearing 
down the highway, mumbling, shitbucket, damnfoolgirl. 

looking  up,  i  noticed  that  the  tree  i'd  fallen  
beneath  was  practically  bald.  only  little  bits  of  green 
here  and  there,  and  lots  of  gray  moss  dangling  to  the  
ground.  even  in  the dark  i could  see  that  it  was  dying, 
and  doing 
in  the  middle  of  all  these 
unconcerned pines. that was the absolute way of things. 
loss  takes  up  inside  of  everything  sooner  or  later  and 
eats right through it. 

it  alone 

humming  drifted  out  of  the  night.  it  wasn't  a 
gospel tune exactly, but it carried all the personality of 
one.  i  followed  the  sound  and  found  rosaleen  in  the 
middle of the creek, not a stitch of clothes on her body. 
water beaded across her shoulders, shining like drops of 

 

84 

milk, and her breasts swayed in the currents. it was the 
kind of vision you never really get over. i couldn't help it, 
i  wanted  to  go  and  lick  the  milk  beads  from  her  
shoulders.  i  opened  my  mouth.  i  wanted  something. 
something, i  didn't know  what. mother, forgive.  that's 
all i could feel. that old longing spread under me like a 
great lap, holding me tight. 

off  came  my  shoes,  my  shorts,  my  top.  i 
hesitated  with  my  underpants,  then  worked  them  off, 
too. 

the  water  felt  like  a  glacier  melting  against  my 
legs.  i  must  have  gasped  at  the 
iciness,  because 
rosaleen looked up and seeing me come naked through 
the water, started to laugh. 

"look at you strutting out here. jiggle-tit and all." 
i eased down beside her, suspending my breath 

at the water's sting. "i'm sorry," i said. 

"i know," she said. "me, too." she reached over 
and patted the roundness of my knee like it was biscuit 
dough. 

thanks  to  the  moon,  i  could  see  clear  down  to  
the creek bottom, all the way to a carpet of pebbles. i 
picked one up—reddish, round, a smooth water heart. i 
popped it into my mouth, sucking for whatever marrow 
was inside it. leaning back on my elbows, i slid down till 
the  water  sealed  over  my  head.  i  held  my  breath  and 

 

85 

listened to the scratch of river against my ears, sinking 
as far as i could into that shimmering, dark world. but i 
was thinking about a suitcase on the floor, about a face i 
could  never  quite  see,  about  the  sweet  smell  of  cold 
cream. 
 

 

 

86 

chapter three 

new  beekeepers  are  told  that  the  way  to 
find the elusive queen is by first locating her circle 
of attendants. 

—the queen must die: and other affairs 
of bees and men 
 
i  love  thoreau  best.  mrs.  henry  made  us  read 
portions  of  walden  pond,  and  afterward 
i'd  had 
fantasies  of  going  to  a  private  garden  where  t.  ray 
would  never  find  me.  i  started  appreciating  mother 
nature, what she'd done with the world. in my mind she 
looked like eleanor roosevelt. 

i  thought  about  her  the  next  morning  when  i 
woke beside the creek in a bed of kudzu vines. a barge 
of  mist  floated  along  the  water,  and  dragonflies, 
iridescent  blue  ones,  darted  back  and  forth  like  they 
were stitching up the air. it was such a pretty sight for a 
second i forgot the heavy feeling i'd carried since t. ray 
had told me about my mother. instead i was at walden 

 

87 

pond.  day  one  of  my  new  life,  i  said  to  myself.  that's  
what this is. 

rosaleen slept with her mouth open and a long 
piece of drool hanging from her bottom lip. i could tell 
by  the  way  her  eyes  rolled  under  her  lids  she  was  
watching the silver screen where dreams come and go. 
her swollen face looked better, but in the bright of day i 
noticed  purple  bruises  on  her  arms  and  legs  as  well. 
neither one of us had a watch on, but going by the sun 
we had slept more than half the morning away. 

i hated to wake rosaleen, so i pulled the wooden 
picture of mary out of my bag and propped it against a 
tree  trunk  in  order  to study  it  properly. a  ladybug  had 
crawled up and sat on the holy mother's cheek, making 
the  most  perfect  beauty  mark  on  her.  i  wondered  if  
mary had been an outdoor type who preferred trees and 
insects over the churchy halo she had on. 

i lay back and tried to invent a story about why 
my mother had owned a black mary picture. i drew a big 
blank, probably  due  to  my ignorance  about  mary,  who 
never  got  much  attention  at  our  church.  according  to 
brother  gerald,  hell  was  nothing  but  a  bonfire  for 
catholics.  we  didn't  have  any  in  sylvan—only  baptists 
and methodists—but we got instructions in case we met 
them in our travels. we were to offer them the five-part 
plan  of  salvation,  which  they  could  accept  or  not.  the 

 

88 

church gave us a plastic glove with each step written on 
a  different  finger.  you  started  with  the  pinkie  and 
worked  over  to  the  thumb.  some  ladies  carried  their 
salvation  gloves  in  their  purse  in  case  they  ran  into  a  
catholic unexpectedly. 

the  only  mary  story  we  talked  about  was  the 
wedding  story—the  time  she  persuaded  her  son, 
practically  against  his  will,  to  manufacture  wine  in  the 
kitchen out of plain water. this had been a shock to me, 
since  our  church  didn't  believe  in  wine  or,  for  that 
matter, in women having a lot of say about things. all i 
could  really  figure was  my  mother  had  been  mixed  up 
with  the  catholics  somehow,  and—i  have  to  say—this 
secretly thrilled me. 

i  stuffed  the  picture 

into  my  pocket  while 
rosaleen slept on, blowing puffs of air that vibrated her 
lips. i decided she might sleep into tomorrow, so i shook 
her arm till her eyes slit open. "lord, i'm stiff," she said. 
"i feel like i've been beaten with a stick." 

"you have been beaten, remember?" 
"but not with a stick," she said. 
i  waited  till  she  got  to  her  feet,  a 

long, 
unbelievable  process  of  grunts  and  moans  and  limbs 
coming to life. 

"what  did  you  dream?"  i  asked  when  she  was  

upright. 

 

89 

she gazed at the treetops, rubbing her elbows. 
"well, let's see. i dreamed the reverend martin 
luther king, jr., knelt down and painted my toenails with 
the spit from his mouth, and every nail was red like he'd 
been sucking on red hots." 

• • • 
i  considered  this  as  we  set  off  for  tiburon, 
rosaleen walking like she was on anointed feet, like her 
ruby toes owned the whole countryside. 

we  drifted  by  gray  barns,  cornfields  in  need  of 
irrigation, and clumps of hereford cows, chewing in slow 
motion, looking very content with their lives. squinting 
into  the  distance,  i  could  see  farmhouses  with  wide 
porches  and  tractor-tire  swings  suspended  from  ropes 
on nearby tree branches; windmills sprouted up beside 
them, their giant silver petals creaking a little when the 
breezes  rose.  the  sun  had  baked  everything  to 
perfection; even the gooseberries on the fence had fried 
to raisins. 

the  asphalt ran  out,  turned  to  gravel.  i listened 
it  made  scraping  under  our  shoes. 
to  the  sound 
perspiration  puddled  in  the  notch  where  rosaleen's 
collarbones  came  together. 
i  didn't  know  whose 
stomach  was  carrying  on  more  about  needing  food, 
mine or hers, and since we'd started walking, i'd realized 
it  was  sunday,  when  the  stores  were  closed  up.  i  was 

 

90 

afraid  we'd  end  up  eating  dandelions,  digging  wild 
turnips and grubs out of the ground to stay alive. 

the smell of fresh manure floated out from the 
fields and took care of my appetite then and there, but 
rosaleen said, "i could eat a mule." 

"if we can find some place open when we get to 

town, i'll go in and get us some food," i told her. 

"and what're we gonna do for beds?" she said. 
"if they don't have a motel, we'll have to rent a 

room." 

she  smiled  at  me  then.  "lily,  child,  there  ain't 
gonna  be  any  place  that  will  take  a  colored  woman.  i  
don't care if she's the virgin mary, nobody's letting her 
stay if she's colored." 

"well,  what  was  the  point  of  the  civil  rights  
act?"  i  said,  coming  to  a  full  stop  in  the  middle  of  the  
road. "doesn't that mean people have to let you stay in 
their motels and eat in their restaurants if you want to?" 
"that's  what  it  means,  but  you  gonna  have  to 

drag people kicking and screaming to do it." 

• • • 
i  spent  the  next  mile  in  deep  worry.  i  had  no  
plan,  no  prospects  of  a  plan.  until  now  i'd  mostly 
believed we would stumble upon a window somewhere 
and climb through it into a brand-new life. 

 

91 

rosaleen, on the other hand, was out here biding 
time till we got caught. counting it as summer vacation 
from  jail.  what  i  needed  was  a  sign.  i  needed  a  voice  
speaking  to  me  like  i'd  heard  yesterday  in  my  room  
saying, lily melissa owens, your jar is open. 

i'll  take  nine  steps  and  look  up.  whatever  my  
eyes light on, that's my sign. when i looked up, i saw a 
crop  duster  plunging  his  little  plane  over  a  field  of 
growing  things,  behind  him  a  cloud  of  pesticides 
parachuting  out.  i  couldn't  decide  what  part  of  this 
scene  i  represented:  the  plants  about  to  be  rescued 
from the bugs or the bugs about to be murdered by the 
spray. there was an off chance i was really the airplane 
zipping  over  the  earth  creating  rescue  and  doom 
everywhere i went. 

i felt miserable. 
the heat had been gathering as we walked, and 

it now dripped down rosaleen's face. 

"too  bad  there's  not  a  church  around  here 

where we could steal some fans," she said. 

• • • 
from  far  away  the  store  on  the  edge  of  town 
looked about a hundred years old, but when we got up 
to it, i saw it was actually older. a sign over the door said 
frogmore  stew  general  store  and  restaurant. 
since 1854. 

 

92 

general  sherman  had  probably  ridden  by  here 
and decided to spare it on the basis of its name, because 
i'm  sure  it  hadn't  been  on  looks.  the  whole  front  of  it  
was a forgotten bulletin board: studebaker service, live 
bait, buddy's fishing tournament, rayford brothers' ice 
plant, deer rifles $45, and a picture of a girl wearing a 
coca-cola  bottle cap  on  her  head.  a  sign  announced  a 
gospel  sing  at  the mount  zion  baptistchurch that took 
place back in 1957, if anyone wanted to know. 

my favorite thing was the fine display of car tags 
nailed up from different states. i would like to have read 
every single one, if i'd had the time. 

in the side yard a colored man lifted the top of a 
barbecue  pit  made  from  an  oil  drum,  and  the  smell  of 
pork lathered in vinegar and pepper drew so much saliva 
from  beneath  my  tongue  i  actually  drooled  onto  my 
blouse. 

a  few  cars  and  trucks  were  parked  out  front, 
probably belonging to people who cut church and came 
here straight from sunday school. 

"i'll go in and see if i can buy some food," i said. 
"and snuff. i need some snuff," said rosaleen. 
while  she  slumped  on  a  bench  near  the 
barbecue drum, i stepped through the screen door into 
the mingled smells of pickled eggs and sawdust, beneath 
dozens  of  sugar-cured  hams  dangling  from  the  ceiling. 

 

93 

the  restaurant  was  situated  in  a  section  at  the  back 
while  the  front  of  the  store  was  reserved  for  selling 
everything from sugarcane stalks to turpentine. 

"may  i  help  you,  young  lady?"  a  small  man 
wearing a bow tie stood on the other side of a wooden 
counter, nearly lost behind a  barricade of scuppernong 
jelly and sweet fire pickles. his voice was high-pitched, 
and  he  had  a  soft,  delicate  look  to  him.  i  could  not  
imagine him selling deer rifles. 

"i don't believe i've seen you before," he said. 
"i'm  not

 i'm  visiting

 from  here.

 my

 

grandmother." 

"i  like  it  when  children  spend  time  with  their 
grandparents," he said. "you can learn a lot from older 
folks." 

"yes,  sir,"  i  said.  "i  learned  more  from  my  

grandmother than i did the whole eighth grade." 

he laughed like this was the most comical thing 
he'd heard in years. "are you here for lunch? we have a 
sunday-plate special—barbecue pork." 

"i'll  take  two  of  them  to  go,"  i  said.  "and  two  

coca-colas, please." 

while  i  waited  for  our  lunch,  i  wandered  along 
the  store  aisles,  stocking  up  for  supper.  packages  of 
salted peanuts, buttermilk cookies, two pimiento-cheese 

 

94 

sandwiches in plastic, sour balls, and a can of red rose 
snuff. i piled it on the counter. 

when  he  returned  with  the  plates  and  drink 
bottles, he shook his head. "i'm sorry, but it's sunday. i 
can't  sell  anything  from  the  store,  just  the  restaurant. 
your  grandma  ought  to  know  that.  what's  her  name 
anyway?" 

"rose," i said, reading it off the snuff can. 
"rose campbell?" 
"yes, sir. rose campbell." 
"i thought she only had grandboys." 
"no, sir, she's got me, too." 
he touched the bag of sour balls. "just leave it all 

here. i'll put it back." 

the cash register pinged, and the drawer banged 
out. i rummaged in my bag for the money and paid him. 
"could  you  open  the  coke  bottles  for  me?"  i 
asked,  and while  he walked  back toward the  kitchen,  i 
dropped the red rose snuff in my bag and zipped it up. 

rosaleen  had  been  beaten  up,  gone  without 
food, slept on the hard ground, and who could say how 
long  before  she'd  be  back  in  jail  or  even  killed?  she 
deserved her snuff. 

i was speculating how one day, years from now, i 
would send the store a dollar in an envelope to cover it, 
spelling out how guilt had dominated every moment of 

 

95 

my life, when i found myself looking at a picture of the 
black  mary.  i  do  not  mean  a  picture  of  just  any  black  
mary. i mean the identical, very same, exact one as my 
mother's. she stared at me from the labels of  a dozen 
jars of honey. black madonna honey, they said. 

the  door  opened,  and  a  family  came  in  fresh  
from church, the mother and daughter dressed alike in 
navy with white peter pan collars. light streamed in the 
door, hazy, warped, blurred with drizzles of yellow. the 
little girl sneezed, and her mother said, "come here, let's 
wipe your nose." 

i  looked  again  at  the  honey  jars,  at  the  amber  
lights swimming inside them, and made myself breathe 
slowly. 

i realized it for the first time in my life: there is 
nothing  but  mystery  in  the  world,  how  it  hides  behind 
the fabric of  our poor, browbeat days, shining brightly, 
and  we  don't  even  know  it.  i  thought  about  the  bees 
that  had  come  to  my  room  at  night,  how  they'd  been 
part  of  it  all.  and  the  voice  i'd  heard  the  day  before,  
saying, lily melissa owens, your jar is open, speaking as 
plain  and  clear  as  the  woman  in  navy  speaking  to  her 
daughter. 

"here's your coca-colas," the bow-tied man was 

saying. 

 

96 

i pointed to the honey jars. "where did you get 

those?" 

he  thought  the  tone  of  shock  in  my  voice  was  

really consternation. 

"i know what you mean. a lot of folks won't buy 
it  "cause  it's  got  the  virgin  mary  pictured  as  a  colored 
woman, but see, that's because the woman who makes 
the honey is colored herself." 

"what's her name?" 
"august boatwright," he said. "she keeps bees all 

over the county." 

keep  breathing,  keep  breathing.  "do  you  know 

where she lives?" 

"oh, sure, it's the darndest house you ever saw. 
painted  like  pepto-bismol.  your  grandmother  surely's 
seen it—you go through town on main street till it turns 
into the highway to florence." 

i walked to the door. "thanks." 
"you tell your grandma hello for me," he said. 
rosaleen's  snores  were  making  the  bench  slats 
tremble. i gave her a shake. "wake up. here's your snuff, 
but put it in your pocket, 'cause i didn't exactly pay for 
it." 

"you stole it?" she said. 
"i  had  to,  'cause  they  don't  sell  items  from  the  

store on sunday." 

 

97 

"your life has gone straight to hell," she said. 
i spread our lunch out like a picnic on the bench 
but couldn't eat a bite of it till i told her about the black 
mary on the honey jar and the beekeeper named august 
boatwright. 

"don't  you  think  my  mother  must've  known 

her?" i said. "it couldn't be just a coincidence." 

she  didn't  answer,  so  i  said  louder,  "rosaleen? 

don't you think so?" 

"i  don't  know  what  i  think,"  she  said.  "i  don't 
want  you  getting  your  hopes  up  too  much,  is  all."  she 
reached  over  and  touched  my  cheek.  "oh,  lily,  what 
have we gone and done?" 

• • • 
tiburon  was  a  place  like  sylvan,  minus  the 
peaches.  in  front  of  the  domed  courthouse  someone 
had stuck a confederate flag in the mouth of their public 
cannon. south carolina was dixie first, america second. 
you could not get the pride of fort sumter out of us if 
you  tried.  strolling  down  main  street,  we  moved 
through  long  blue  shadows  cast  from  the  two-story 
buildings  that  ran  the  length  of  the  street.  at  a  
drugstore,  i  peered  through  the  plate  glass  at  a  soda  
fountain  with  chrome  trim,  where  they  sold  cherry 
cokes and banana splits, thinking that soon it would not 
be just for white people anymore. 

 

98 

we  walked  past  worth 

insurance  agency, 
tiburon  county  rural  electric  office,  and  the  amen 
dollar store, which had hula hoops, swim goggles, and 
boxes  of  sparklers  in  the  window  with  summer  fun 
spray-painted across the glass. 

a  few  places,  like  the  farmers  trust  bank,  had 
goldwater  for  president  signs  in  their  windows, 
sometimes  with  a  bumper  sticker  across  the  bottom 
saying affirmation vietnam. 

at the tiburon post office i left rosaleen on the 
sidewalk  and  stepped  inside  to  where  the  post  office 
boxes and the sunday newspapers were kept. as far as i 
could tell, there were no wanted posters in there of me 
and  rosaleen,  and  the  front-page  headline 
in  the 
columbia paper was about castro's sister spying for the 
cia and not a word about a white girl breaking a negro 
woman out of jail in sylvan. 

if 

the  story  was 

i  dropped  a  dime  into  the  slot  and  took  one  of  
inside 
the  papers,  wondering 
somewhere.  rosaleen and  i  squatted  on  the  ground  in 
an alley and spread out the paper, opening every page. 
it  was  full  of  malcolm  x,  saigon,  the  beatles,  tennis  at  
wimbledon,  and  a  motel  in  jackson,  mississippi,  that 
closed  down  rather  than  accept  negro  guests,  but 
nothing about me and rosaleen. 

 

99 

sometimes  you  want  to  fall  on  your  knees  and 
thank god in heaven for all the poor news reporting that 
goes on in the world. 
 

 

 

100 

chapter four 

honeybees  are  social  insects  and  live  in 
colonies. each colony is a family unit, comprising a 
single,  egg-laying  female  or  queen  and  her  many 
sterile  daughters  called  workers.  the  workers 
cooperate in the food-gathering, nest-building and 
rearing the offspring.  

males are reared only at the times of year 

when their presence is required. 

—bees of the world 
 
the woman moved along a  row of white boxes 
that bordered woods beside the pink house, a house so 
pink  it  remained  a  scorched  shock  on  the  back  of  my  
eyelids  after  i  looked  away.  she  was  tall,  dressed  in 
white,  wearing  a  pith  helmet  with  veils  that  floated 
across  her  face,  settled  around  her  shoulders,  and 
trailed down her back. she looked like an african bride. 

 

101 

lifting the tops off the boxes, she peered inside, 
swinging a tin bucket of smoke back and forth. clouds of 
bees rose up and flew wreaths around her head. twice 
she  disappeared  in  the  fogged  billows,  then  gradually 
reemerged like a dream rising up from the bottom of the 
night. 

we  stood  across  the  road,  rosaleen  and  i, 
temporarily  mute.  me  out  of  awe  for  the  mystery  
playing  out  and  rosaleen  because  her  lips  were  sealed 
with red rose snuff. 

"she's  the  woman  who  makes  the  black 
madonna honey," i said. i was unable to  take my eyes 
off  her,  the  mistress  of  bees,  the  portal  into  my 
mother's life. august. 

rosaleen,  wilting,  spit  a  stream  of  black  juice, 
then  wiped  away  the  mustache  of  perspiration  above 
her lip. 

"i  hope  she  makes  honey  better  than  she  picks 

out paint." 

"i like it," i announced. 
we waited till she went inside, then crossed the 
highway  and  opened  the  gate  in  the  picket  fence  that 
was  about  to  topple  over  from  the  weight  of  carolina 
jasmine. add that to all the chive, dillweed, and lemon 
balm  growing  around  the  porch  and  the  smell  could 
knock you over. 

 

102 

we stood on the  porch in the  pink  light  shining 
off the house. june bugs flickered all around, and music 
notes floated from inside, sounding like a violin, only  a 
lot  sadder.  my  heart  kicked  in.  i  asked  rosaleen  if  she  
could hear it beating, it was that loud. 

"i  don't  hear  nothing  but  the  good  lord  asking 
me what i'm doing here." she spit what i hoped was the 
last of her snuff. 

i knocked on the door while she muttered a slew 
of  words  under  her  breath:  give  me  strength…  baby 
jesus… lost our feeble minds. 

the  music  stopped.  in  the  corner  of  my  eye  i  
caught  a  slight  movement  at  the  window,  a  venetian 
blind  slit  open,  then  closed.  when  the  door  opened,  it 
was  not the  woman in white  but another one wearing 
red,  her  hair  cut  so  short  it  resembled  a  little  gray, 
curlicue swim cap  pulled tight  over her scalp.  her face 
stared at us, suspicious and stern. i noticed she carried a 
musical bow tucked under her arm like a riding whip. it 
crossed my mind she might use it on us. 

"yes?" 
"are you august boatwright?" 
"no,  i'm  june  boatwright,"  she  said,  her  eyes 
sweeping  over  the  stitches  on  rosaleen's  forehead. 
"august boatwright is my sister. you came to see her?" 

 

103 

i  nodded,  and  simultaneously  another  woman 
appeared,  with  bare  feet.  she  wore  a  green-and-white 
sleeveless  gingham  dress  and  short  braids  that  stuck 
straight out all over her head. 

"i'm  may  boatwright,"  she  said.  "i'm  august's 
sister, too." she smiled at us, one of those odd grins that 
let you know she was not an altogether normal person. 

i wished june with her whip would grin, too, but 

she only looked annoyed. 

"is august expecting you?" she said, directing her 

words to rosaleen. 

of course rosaleen jumped in ready  to spill the 

whole story. 

"no, see, lily has this picture—" 
i broke in. "i saw a honey jar back at the store, 

and the man said…" 

"oh,  you've  come  for  honey.  well,  why  didn't 
you say so? come on in the front parlor. i'll get august." 
i shot a look at rosaleen that said, are you crazy? 
don't  tell  them  about  the  picture.  we  were  going  to  
have to get our stories straight, that was for sure. 

some  people  have  a  sixth  sense,  and  some  are  
duds at it. i believe i must have it, because the moment i 
stepped into the house i felt a trembling along my skin, a 
traveling  current  that  moved  up  my  spine,  down  my 
arms,  pulsing  out  from  my  fingertips.  i  was  practically 

 

104 

radiating. the body knows things a long time before the 
mind  catches  up  to  them.  i  was  wondering  what  my  
body knew that i didn't. 

i  smelled  furniture  wax  everywhere.  somebody 
had gone over the entire parlor with it, a big room with 
fringed throw rugs, an old piano with a lace runner, and 
cane-bottom  rockers  draped  with  afghans.  each  chair 
had its own little velvet stool sitting before it. velvet. i 
went over and rubbed my hand across one of them. 

next  i  walked  over  to  a  drop-leaf  table  and  
sniffed a beeswax candle that smelled precisely like the 
furniture  wax.  it  sat  in  a  star-shaped  holder  next  to  a 
jigsaw  puzzle  in  progress,  though  i  couldn't  tell  what 
picture it would make. a wide-mouthed milk bottle filled 
with gladiolus was perched on another table under the 
window.  the  curtains  were  organdy,  not  your  average 
white  organdy  but silver-gray,  so  the air  came through 
with a slightly smoky shimmer. 

imagine walls with nothing on them but mirrors. 
i counted five of them, each one with a big brass frame 
around it. then i turned around and looked back toward 
the  door  where  i'd  come  in.  over  in  the  corner  was  a 
carving of a woman nearly three feet tall. she was one of 
those  figures  that  had  leaned  out  from  the  front  of  a 
ship in olden times, so old she could have been on the 
santa maria with columbus for all i knew. 

 

105 

• • • 
she  was  black  as  she  could  be,  twisted  like 
driftwood from being out in the weather, her face a map 
of all the storms and journeys she'd been through.  her 
right  arm  was  raised,  as  if  she  was  pointing  the  way, 
except  her  fingers  were  closed  in  a  fist.  it  gave  her  a  
serious  look, 
if 
necessary. 

like  she  could  straighten  you  out 

even though she wasn't dressed up like mary and 
didn't  resemble  the  picture  on  the  honey  jar,  i  knew 
that's who she was. she had a faded red heart painted 
on her breast and a yellow crescent moon, worn down 
and  crooked,  painted  where  her  body  would  have 
blended into the ship's wood. a candle inside a tall red 
glass  threw  glints  and  glimmers  across  her  body.  she 
was a mix of mighty and humble all in one. i didn't know 
what to think, but what i felt was magnetic and so big it 
ached like the moon had entered my chest and filled it 
up. 

the  only  thing  i  could  compare  it  to  was  the  
feeling  i  got  one  time  when  i  walked  back  from  the  
peach stand and saw  the sun spreading across the late 
afternoon, setting  the top  of the  orchard on  fire while 
darkness  collected  underneath.  silence  had  hovered 
over my head, beauty multiplying in the air, the trees so 
transparent i felt i could see through to something pure 

 

106 

inside  them.  my  chest  had  ached  then,  too,  this  very  
same way. 

the lips on the statue had a beautiful, bossy half 
smile,  the  sight  of  which  caused  me  to  move  both  my  
hands up to my throat. everything about that smile said, 
lily owens, i know you down to the core. 

i  felt  she  knew  what  a  lying,  murdering,  hating 
person i really was. how i hated t. ray, and the girls at 
school, but mostly myself for taking away my mother. 

i  wanted  to  cry,  but  then,  in  the  next  instant,  i  
wanted to laugh, because the statue also made me feel 
like  lily  the smiled-upon, like there  was goodness  and 
beauty in me, too. like i really had all that fine potential 
mrs. henry said i did. 

standing there, i loved myself and i hated myself. 
that's what the black mary did to me, made me feel my 
glory and my shame at the same time. 

i stepped closer to her and caught the faint scent 
of honey coming from the wood. may walked over and 
stood beside me, and i could smell nothing then but the 
pomade on her hair, onions on her hands, vanilla on her 
breath.  her  palms  were  pink  like  the  bottoms  of  her 
feet,  her  elbows  darker  than  the  rest  of  her,  and  for 
some  reason  the  sight  of  them  filled  me  with 
tenderness. 
• • • 

 

107 

august  boatwright  entered,  wearing  a  pair  of 
rimless glasses and a lime green chiffon scarf tied onto 
her belt. "who've we got here?" she said, and the sound 
of her voice snapped me back to my ordinary senses. 

she  was  almond-buttery  with  sweat  and  sun, 
herface  corrugated  with  a  thousand  caramel  wrinkles 
and  her  hair  looking  flour  dusted,  but  the  rest  of  her 
seemed decades younger. 

"i'm lily,  and that's  rosaleen,"  i said,  hesitating 
as june appeared in the doorway behind her. i opened 
my mouth without any sense of what i would say next. 
what came out  couldn't have surprised  me more.  "we 
ran away from home and don't have any place to go," i 
told her. 

any  other  day  of  my  life  i  could  have  won  a  
fibbing  contest  hands  down,  and  that,  that  is  what  i 
came up with: the pathetic truth. i watched their faces, 
especially august's. she took off her glasses and rubbed 
the depressions on each side of her nose. it was so quiet 
i could hear a clock ticking in another room. 

august replaced her glasses, walked to rosaleen, 
and  examined  the  stitches  on  her  forehead,  the  cut 
under her  eye, the bruises along her temple and arms. 
"you look like you've been beaten." 

"she  fell  down  the  front  steps  when  we  were 
leaving," i offered, returning to my natural fibbing habit. 

 

108 

august  and  june  traded  looks  while  rosaleen 
narrowed  her  eyes,  letting  me  know  i'd  done  it  again, 
speaking for her like she wasn't even there. 

"well, you can stay here till you figure out what 
to do. we can't have you living on the side of the road," 
said august. 

the intake of june's breath nearly sucked the air 

from the room. "but, august—" 

"they'll stay here," she repeated in a way that let 
me know who the big sister was and who the little sister 
was. 

"it'll be all right. we've got the cots in the honey 
house." june flounced out, her red skirt flashing around 
the door. 

"thank you," i said to august. 
"you're  welcome.  now,  sit  down.  i'll  get  some 

orangeade." 

we  got  situated  in  the  cane-bottom  rockers 
while may stood guard, grinning her crazy-woman grin. 
she had great big muscles in her arms, i noticed. 

"how  come y'all  have names from  a  calendar?" 

rosaleen asked her. 

"our  mother  loved  spring  and  summer,"  may 
said. "we had an april, too, but… she died when she was 
little."  may's  grin  dissolved,  and  out  of  nowhere  she 

 

109 

started  humming  "oh!  susanna"  like  her life  depended 
on it. 

rosaleen  and  i  stared  at  her  as  her  humming 
turned into hard crying. she cried like april's death had 
happened only this second. 

finally august returned with a  tray of  four jelly 

glasses, orange slices stuck real pretty on the rims. 

"oh, may, honey, you go on out to the wall and 
finish  your  cry,"  she said,  pointing her  to the  door  and 
giving her a nudge. 

august  acted  like  this  was  the  sort  of  normal  
in  south 

in  every  household 

behavior  happening 
carolina. "here you go orangeade." 

i sipped. rosaleen, however, downed hers so fast 
she  let  out  a belch that the boys  in my  old  junior high 
would have envied. it was unbelievable. 

august  pretended  she  didn't  hear  it  while  i 
stared at the velvet footstool and wished rosaleen could 
be more cultured. 

"so  you're  lily  and  rosaleen,"  august  said.  "do  

you have last names?" 

"rosaleen… smith, and lily… williams," i lied and 
then  launched  in.  "see,  my  mother  died  when  i  was 
little, and then my father died in a tractor accident last 
month on our farm in spar- tanburg county. i don't have 

 

110 

any other kin around here, so they were going to send 
me to a home." 

august  shook  her  head.  rosaleen  shook  hers, 

too, but for a different reason. 

"rosaleen  was  our  housekeeper,"  i  went  on. 
"she doesn't have any family but me, so we decided to 
go up to virginia to find my aunt. except we don't have 
any money, so if you have any work for us to do while 
we're here, maybe we could earn a little before heading 
on. we aren't really in a hurry to get to virginia." 

rosaleen  glared  at  me.  for  a  minute  there  was 
nothing but ice clinking in our glasses. i hadn't realized 
how sweltering the room was, how stimulated my sweat 
glands had gotten. i could actually smell myself. i cut my 
eyes  over  to  the  black  mary  in  the  corner  and  back  to  
august. 

she  put  down  her  glass.  i  had  never  seen  eyes 

that color, eyes the purest shade of ginger. 

"i'm from virginia myself," she said, and for some 
reason this stirred up the current that had moved in my 
limbs  when i'd  first  entered the  room.  "all  right,  then. 
rosaleen can help may  in the house, and  you can help 
me and zach with the bees. zach is my main helper, so i 
can't pay you anything, but at least you'll have a room 
and some food till we call your aunt and see about her 
sending some bus money." 

 

111 

"i  don't  exactly  know  her  whole  name,"  i  said.  
"my father just called her aunt bernie; i never met her." 
"well,  what  were  you  planning  to  do,  child,  go 

door to door in virginia?" 

"no, ma'am, just richmond." 
"i see," said august. and the thing was, she did. 

she saw right through it. 

• • • 
that  afternoon,  heat  built  up  in  the  skies  over 
tiburon; finally it gave  way to  a thunderstorm. august, 
rosaleen, and i stood on the screen porch that jutted off 
the  back  of  the  kitchen  and  watched  the  clouds  bruise 
dark  purple  over  the  treetops  and  the  wind  whip  the 
branches. we were waiting for a let-up so august could 
show  us  our  new  quarters  in  the  honey  house,  a 
converted garage in the back corner of the yard painted 
the same hot-flamingo shade as the rest of the house. 

now  and  then  sprays  of  rain  flew  over  and 

misted our faces. 

every time i refused to wipe away the wetness. it 
made the world seem so alive to me. i couldn't help but 
envy the way a good storm got everyone's attention. 

august went back into the kitchen and returned 
with  three  aluminum  pie  pans  and  handed  them  out. 
"come  on.  let's  make  a  run  for  it.  these  will  keep  our  
heads dry, at least." 

 

112 

august and i dashed into the downpour, holding 
the pans over our heads. glancing back, i saw rosaleen 
holding  the  pie  pan  in  her  hand,  missing  the  whole 
point. 

when august and i reached the honey house, we 
had  to  huddle  in  the  door  and  wait  on  her.  rosaleen 
glided along, gathering rain in the pan and flinging it out 
like  a  child  would do.  she  walked  on  puddles  like  they 
were  persian  carpets,  and  when  a  clap  of  thunder 
boomed around us, she looked up at the drowned sky, 
opened  her  mouth,  and  let  the  rain  fall  in.  ever  since 
those  men  had  beaten  her,  her  face  had  been  so 
pinched and tired, her eyes dull like they'd had the light 
knocked out of them. now i could see she was returning 
to herself, looking  like an  all-weather queen out there, 
like nothing could touch her. if only she could get some 
manners. 

the inside of the honey house was one big room 
filled  with  strange  honey-making  machines—big  tanks, 
gas  burners,  troughs,  levers,  white  boxes,  and  racks 
piled  with  waxy  honeycombs.  my  nostrils  nearly 
drowned in the scent of sweetness. 

rosaleen  made  gigantic  puddles  on  the  floor 
while august ran for towels. i stared at a side wall that 
was  covered  with  shelves  of  mason  jars.  pith  helmets 
with  netting,  tools,  and  wax  candles  hung  from  nails 

 

113 

near  the  front  door,  and  a  thin  veneer  of  honey  lay  
across everything. the soles of my shoes stuck slightly as 
i walked. 

august led us to a tiny corner room in the back 
with a sink, a full-length mirror, one curtainless window, 
and two wooden cots made up with clean white sheets. i 
placed my bag on the first cot. 

"may  and  i  sleep  out  here  sometimes  when 
we're harvesting honey round the clock," august said. "it 
can get hot, so you'll need to turn the fan on." 

rosaleen  reached  up  to  where  it  sat  on  a  shelf  
along  the  back  wall  and  flipped  the  switch,  causing 
cobwebs  to  blow  off  the  blades  and  fly  all  over  the  
room. she had to pick them off her cheekbones. 
"you need dry clothes," august told her. 
"i'll air-dry," rosaleen said, and she stretched out 

on the cot, making the legs on it bow. 

"you'll  have  to  come  into  the  house  to  use  the 
bathroom,"  august  said.  "we  don't  lock  the  doors,  so 
just come on in." 

rosaleen's  eyes  were  closed.  she  had  already 
drifted  off  and  was  making  little  puff  noises  with  her 
mouth. 

august lowered her voice. "so she fell down the 

steps?" 

 

114 

"yes,  ma'am,  she  went  down  headfirst.  caught 
her foot in the rug at the top of the stairs, the one my 
mother hooked herself." 

the  secret  of  a  good  lie  is  don't  overly  explain, 

and throw in one good detail. 

"well,  miss  williams,  you  can  start  work 

tomorrow," she said. 

i stood there wondering who she was talking to, 
who was miss williams, when i remembered i was lily 
williams now. that's the other secret to lying—you have 
to keep your stories straight. 

"zach will be away for a week," she was saying. 
"his family has gone down to pawley's island to visit his 
mama's sister." 

"if  you  don't  mind  me  asking,  what  will  i  be  

doing?" 

"you'll  work  with  zach  and  me,  making  the 
honey,  doing  whatever  needs  doing.  come  on,  i'll  give 
you the tour." 

we  walked  back  to  the  large  room  with  all  the  
machines.  she  led  me  to  a  column  of  white  boxes 
stacked one on top of the other. 

"these  are  called  supers,"  she  said,  setting  one 

on the floor in front of me and removing the lid. 

from  the  outside  it  looked  like  a  regular  old 
drawer  pulled  out  of  the  dresser,  but  inside  it  were 

 

115 

frames  of  honeycomb  hung  in  a  neat  row.  each  frame 
was filled with honey and sealed over with beeswax. 

she pointed her finger. "that's the uncapper over 
there, where we take the wax off the comb. then it goes 
through the wax melter over here." 

i followed her, stepping over bits and pieces of 
honeycomb,  which  is  what  they  had  instead  of  dust 
bunnies. she stopped at the big metal tank in the center 
of the room. 

"this  is  the  spinner,"  she  said,  patting  the  side 

like it was a good dog. "go on up there and look in." 

i  climbed  up  the  two-step  ladder  and  peered 
over the edge, while august flipped a switch and an old 
motor on the floor sputtered and cranked. the spinner 
started  slowly,  gaining  speed  like  the  cotton-candy 
machine at the fair, until it was sending heavenly smells 
into the atmosphere. 

"it separates out the honey," she said. "takes out 
the  bad  stuff,  leaves  in  the  good.  i've  always  thought 
how  nice  it  would  be  to  have  spinners  like  this  for 
human beings, just toss them in and let the spinner do 
its work." 

i looked back at her, and she was staring at me 
with her ginger-cake eyes. was i paranoid to think that 
when  she'd  said  human  beings,  what  she  really  meant 
was me? 

 

116 

she  turned  off  the  motor,  and  the  humming 
stoppedwith a series of ticking sounds. bending over the 
brown  tube  leading  from  the  spinner,  she  said,  "from 
here  it  goes  into  the  baffle  tank,  then  over  to  the  
warming  pan,  and  finally  into  the  settling  tank.  that's 
the honey gate, where we fill the buckets. 

you'll get the hang of it." 
i  doubted  it.  i'd  never  seen  such  a  complex 

situation in my life. 

"well,  i  imagine  you'll  want  to  rest  up  like 
like  sweet-potato 

is  at  six.  you 

rosaleen.  supper 
biscuits? that's may's specialty." 

• • • 
when she left, i lay on the empty cot while rain 
crashed on the tin roof. i felt like i'd been traveling for 
weeks, like i'd been dodging lions and tigers on a safari 
through  the  jungle,  trying  to  get  to  the  lost  diamond 
city  buried  in  the  congo,  which  happened  to  be  the 
theme  of  the  last  matinee  i'd  seen  in  sylvan  before 
leaving. i felt that somehow i belonged here, i really did, 
but i could have been in the congo for how unfamiliar it 
felt.  staying  in  a  colored  house  with  colored  women, 
eating off their dishes, lying on their sheets—it was not 
something i was against, but i was brand-new to it, and 
my  skin  had  never  felt  so  white  to  me.  t.  ray  did  not  
think colored women were smart. since i want to tell the 

 

117 

whole  truth,  which  means  the  worst  parts,  i  thought 
they could be smart, but not as smart as me, me being 
white. lying on the cot in the honey house, though, all i 
could think was august is so intelligent, so cultured, and 
i was  surprised  by  this.  that's  what  let me  know  i had 
some prejudice buried inside me. 

when  rosaleen  woke from  her  nap,  before  she 
had a chance to raise her head off the pillow, i said, "do 
you like it here?" 

"i guess i do," she said, working to get herself to 

a sitting position. "so far." 

"well, i like it, too," i said. "so i don't want you 

saying anything to mess it up, okay?" 

she  crossed  her  arms  over  her  belly  and  

frowned. "like what?" 

"don't say anything about the black mary picture 

i got in my bag, okay? and don't mention my mother." 

she reached up and started twisting some of her 
loose braids back together. "now, how come you wanna 
keep that a secret?" 

i  hadn't  had  time  to  sort  out  my  reasons.  i  
wanted  to  say,  because  i  just  want  to  be  normal  for  a  
little  while—not  a  refugee  girl  looking  for  her  mother, 
but a regular girl paying a summer visit to tiburon, south 
carolina. i  want time to win august over, so she won't 
send me  back when  she finds out  what  i've done.  and 

 

118 

those  things  were  true,  but  even  as  they  crossed  my 
mind, i knew they didn't completely explain why talking 
to august about my mother made me so uneasy. 

i went over and began helping rosaleen with her 
braids. my hands,  i noticed, were shaking  a little.  "just 
tell me you aren't gonna say anything," i said. 

"it's  your  secret,"  she  said.  "you  do  what  you 

want with it." 
• • • 
the  next  morning  i  woke  early  and  walked  
outside.  the  rain  had  stopped  and  the  sun  glowed 
behind a bank of clouds. 

pinewoods stretched beyond the honey house in 

every direction. 

i could make out about fourteen beehives tucked 
under  the  trees  in  the  distance,  the  tops  of  them 
postage stamps of white shine. the night before, during 
dinner,  august  had  said  she  owned  twenty-eight  acres 
left to her by her granddaddy. 

a  girl  could  get  lost  on  twenty-eight  acres  in  a  
little  town  like  this.  she  could  open  a  trapdoor  and 
disappear. 

light  spilled  through  a  crack  in  a  red-rimmed 
cloud, and i walked toward it along a path that led from 
the  honey  house  into  the  woods.  i  passed  a  child's 
wagon loaded with garden tools. it rested beside a plot 

 

119 

growing tomatoes tied to wooden stakes with pieces of 
nylon hose. mixed in with them were orange zinnias and 
lavender gladiolus that dipped toward the ground. 

the sisters loved birds, i could see. there was a 
concrete  birdbath  and  tons  of  feeders—hollowed-out 
gourds  and  rows  of  big  pinecones  sitting  everywhere, 
each one smeared with peanut butter. 

where the grass gave way to the woods, i found 
a stone wall crudely cemented together, not even knee 
high but nearly fifty yards long. it curved on around the 
property  and  abruptly  stopped.  it  didn't  seem  to  have 
any purpose to it. then i noticed tiny pieces of folded-up 
paper stuck in the crevices around the stones. i walked 
the length of the fence, and it was the same all the way, 
hundreds of these bits of paper. 

i  pulled  one  out  and  opened  it,  but  the  writing 
was  too  blurred  from  rain  to  make  out.  i  dug  out  
another one. 

birmingham, sept 15, four little angels dead. 
i  folded  it  and  put  it  back,  feeling  like  i'd  done 

something wrong. 

stepping  over  the  wall,  i  moved  into  the  trees,  
picking my way through little ferns with their blueogreen 
feathers, careful not to tear the designs the spiders had 
worked  so  hard  on  all  morning.  it  was  like  me  and 
rosaleen really had discovered the lost diamond city. 

 

120 

as i walked, i began to hear the sound of running 
water.  it's  impossible  to  hear  that  sound  and  not  go 
searching  for  the  source.  i  pushed  deeper  into  the 
woods.  the  growth  turned  thick,  and  sticker  bushes 
snagged my legs, but i found it—a little river, not much 
bigger than the creek where rosaleen and i had bathed. 
i  watched  the  currents  meander,  the  lazy  ripples  that 
once in a while broke along the surface. 

taking  off  my  shoes,  i  waded  in.  the  bottom 
turned  mushy,  squishing  up  through  my  toes.  a  turtle 
plopped  off  a  rock  into  the  water  right  in  front  of  me,  
nearly  scaring  the  lord  jesus  out  of  me.  there  was  no  
telling  what  other  invisible  creatures  i  was  out  here 
socializing with—snakes, frogs, fish, a whole river world 
of biting bugs, and i could have cared less. 

when  i  put  on  my  shoes  and  headed  back,  the 
light poured down in shafts, and i wanted it to always be 
like this—no t. ray, no mr. gaston, nobody wanting to 
beat  rosaleen  senseless.  just  the  rain-cleaned  woods 
and the rising light. 
 

 

 

121 

chapter five 

let's imagine for a moment that we are tiny 
enough to follow a bee into a hive. usually the first 
thing  we  would  have  to  get  used  to  is  the 
darkness… 

—exploring the world of social insects 
 

the first week at august's was a consolation. 
the  world  will  give  you  that  once  in  a  while,  a  
brief time out; the boxing bell rings and you go to your 
corner,  where  somebody  dabs  mercy  on  your  beat-up 
life. 

all  that  week  no  one  brought  up  my  father, 
supposedly  dead  in  a  tractor  accident,  or  my  long-lost 
aunt bernie in virginia. the calendar sisters just took us 
in. 

the  first  thing  they  did  was  take  care  of  

rosaleen's clothes. 

august  got  into  her  truck  and  went  straight  to 
the amen dollar store, where she bought rosaleen four 

 

122 

pairs  of  panties,  a  pale  blue  cotton  nightgown,  three 
waistless, hawaiian-looking dresses, and a bra that could 
have slung boulders. 

"this  ain't  charity,"  said  rosaleen  when  august 
spread this, across the kitchen table. "i'll pay it all back." 

"you can work it off," said august. 
may  came  in  with  witch  hazel  and  cotton  balls 

and began to clean up rosaleen's stitches. 

"somebody  knocked  the  daylights  out  of  you," 
she  said,  and  a  moment  later  she  was  humming  "oh! 
susanna"  at  that  same  frantic  speed  she'd  hummed  it 
before. 

june  jerked  her  head  up  from  the  table,  where 
she was inspecting the purchases. "you're humming the 
song  again,"  she  said  to  may.  "why  don't  you  excuse 
yourself?" 

may  dropped  her  cotton  ball  on  the  table  and 
left  the room. i  looked at  rosaleen,  and she  shrugged. 
june  finished  cleaning  the  stitches  herself; 
it  was 
distasteful  to  her,  i  could  tell  by  the  way  she  held  her 
mouth, how it drew into a tight buttonhole. 

i slipped out to find may. i was going to say, i'll 
sing "oh! susanna" with you start to finish, but i couldn't 
find her. 

it was may who taught me the honey song: 

 

123 

beehive 
honey 
dead 

i 

want 

on 

my 

soak 
and 

from 

grave 
through. 
gone, 
you. 

place 
let 

a 
the 

i'm 
what 

and 
when 
that's 
 
the 
but 
 
place 
and let the honey soak through. 

beehive 

a 

streets  of  heaven  are  gold  and 
sunny, 
i'll  stick  with  my  plot  and  a  pot  of  honey. 

on 

my 

grave 

i  loved  the  silliness  of  it.  singing  made  me  feel 
like  a  regular  person  again.  may  sang  the  song  in  the 
kitchen when she rolled dough or sliced tomatoes, and 
august hummed it when she pasted labels on the honey 
jars. it said everything about living here. 

we lived for honey. we swallowed a spoonful in 
the morning to wake us up and one at night to put us to 
sleep. we took it with every meal to calm the mind, give 
us  stamina,  and  prevent  fatal  disease.  we  swabbed 
ourselves  in  it  to  disinfect  cuts  or  heal  chapped  lips.  it  
went in our baths, our skin cream, our raspberry tea and 
biscuits. nothing was safe from honey. in one week my 
skinny arms and legs began to plump out and the frizz in 
my hair turned to silken waves. august said honey was 
the  ambrosia  of  the  gods  and  the  shampoo  of  the 
goddesses. 

 

124 

i spent my time in the honey house with august 
while rosaleen helped may around the house. i learned 
how to run a steam heated knife along the super, slicing 
the wax cap off the combs, how to load them just so into 
the  spinner.  i  adjusted  the  flame  under  the  steam 
generator and changed the nylon stockings august used 
to filter the honey in the settling tank. i caught on so fast 
she said i was a marvel. those were her very words: lily, 
you are marvel. 

my favorite thing was pouring beeswax into the 
candle  molds.  august  used  a  pound  of  wax  per  candle 
and pressed tiny violets into them, which i collected in 
the  woods.  she  had  a  mail-order  business  to  stores  in 
places  as  far  away  as  maine  and  vermont.  people  up 
there bought so many of her candles and jars of honey 
she couldn't keep up with it, and there were tins of black 
madonna  all-purpose  beeswax 
special 
customers.  august  said  it  could  make  your  fishing  line 
float,  your  button  thread  stronger,  your  furniture 
shinier, your stuck window glide, and your irritated skin 
glow like a baby's bottom. beeswax was a miracle cure 
for everything. 

for  her 

• • • 
may and rosaleen hit it off right away. may was 
simpleminded. i don't mean retarded, because she was 
smart  in  some  ways  and  read  cookbooks  nonstop.  i 

 

125 

mean she was naive and unassuming, a grown-up and a 
child  at  the  same  time,  plus  she  was  a  touch  crazy.  
rosaleen liked to say may was a bona fide candidate for 
the nuthouse, but she still took to her. i would come into 
the  kitchen  and  they  would  be  standing  shoulder  to 
shoulder at the sink, holding ears of corn they couldn't 
get shucked for talking. or they'd be dabbing pinecones 
with peanut butter for the birds. 

it was rosaleen who figured out the mystery of 

"oh! susanna." 

she said if you kept things on a happy note, may 
did  fine,  but  bring  up  an  unpleasant  subject—like 
rosaleen's head full of stitches or the tomatoes having 
rot-bottom—and  may  would  start  humming  "oh! 
susanna." it seemed to be her personal way of warding 
off crying. it worked for things like tomato rot, but not 
for much else. 

a few times she cried so bad, ranting and tearing 
her hair, that rosaleen had to come get august from the 
honey house. august would calmly send may out back to 
the stone wall. going out there was about the only thing 
that could bring her around. 

may  didn't  allow  rat  traps  in  the  house,  as  she 
couldn't  even  bear  the  thought  of  a  suffering  rat.  but 
what  reallydrove  rosaleen  crazy  was  may  catching 
spiders  and  carrying  them  out  of  the  house  in  the 

 

126 

dustpan. i liked this about may, since it reminded me of 
my bug-loving mother. i went around helping may catch 
granddaddy  longlegs,  not  just  because  a  smashed  bug 
could  send  her  over  the  edge  but  because  i  felt  i  was  
being loyal to my mother's wishes. 

may  had  to  have  a  banana  every  morning,  and 
this banana absolutely could not have a bruise on it. one 
morning  i  watched  her  peel  seven  bananas  in  a  row 
before she found one without a bad place. she kept tons 
of bananas around the kitchen, stoneware bowls chock-
full; next to honey, they were the most plentiful thing in 
the  house.  may  could  go  through  five  or  more  every  
morning looking for the ideal, flawless banana, the one 
that hadn't gotten banged up by the grocery world. 

rosaleen  made  banana  pudding,  banana  cream 
pie, banana jell-o, and banana slices on lettuce leaf till 
august told her it was all right, just throw the blooming 
things away. 
• • • 
the one it was hard to get a fix on was june. she 
taught  history  and  english  at  the  colored  high  school, 
but  what  she  really  loved  was  music.  if  i  got  finished  
early  in  the  honey  house,  i  went  to  the  kitchen  and 
watched may and rosaleen cook, but really i was there 
to listen to june play the cello. 

 

127 

she played music for dying people, going to their 
homes and even to the hospital to serenade them into 
the  next  life.  i  had  never  heard  of  such  a  thing,  and  i 
would sit at the table drinking sweet iced tea, wondering 
if  this  was  the  reason  june  smiled  so  little.  maybe  she  
was  around  death  too  much.  i  could  tell  she  was  still 
bristled at the idea of me and rosaleen staying; it was 
the one sore point about our being here. 

i  overheard  her  talking  to  august  one  night  on 
the back porch as i was coming across the yard to go to 
the  bathroom  in  the  pink  house.  their  voices  stopped 
me beside the hydrangea bush. 

"you know she's lying," said june. 
"i know," august  told her.  "but they're  in some 
kind  of  trouble and need  a place  to  stay.  who's  gonna 
take  them  in  if  we  don't—a  white  girl  and  a  negro  
woman? nobody around here." 

for  a  second  neither  spoke.  i  heard  the  moths 
landing against the porch lightbulb. june said, "we can't 
keep  a  runaway  girl  here  without  letting  somebody 
know." 

august turned toward the screen and looked out, 
causing me to step deeper into  the shadows  and press 
my back against the house.  "let who know?" she said. 
"the  police?  they  would  only  haul  her  off  someplace. 

 

128 

maybe her father really did die. if so, who better is she 
gonna stay with for the time being than us?" 

"what about this aunt she mentioned?" 
"there's no aunt and you know it," said august. 
june's  voice  sounded  exasperated.  "what  if  her 
father didn't die in this so-called tractor accident? won't 
he be looking for her?" 

a  pause  followed.  i  crept  closer  to  the  edge  of  
the  porch.  "i  just  have  a  feeling  about  this,  june. 
something tells me not to send her back to some place 
she doesn't want to be. not yet, at least. she has some 
reason  for  leaving.  maybe  he mistreated  her.  i  believe 
we can help her." 

"why  don't  you  just  ask  her  point-blank  what 

kind of trouble she's in?" 

"everything in time," august said. "the last thing 
i want is to scare her off with a lot of questions. she'll 
tell us when she's ready. let's be patient." 

"but she's white, august." 
this was a great revelation—not that i was white 
but  that  it  seemed  like  june  might  not  want  me  here 
because  of  my  skin  color.  i  hadn't  known  this  was  
possible—to reject people for  being white. a hot wave 
passed  through  my  body.  "righteous  indignation"  is 
what  brother  gerald  called  it.  jesus  had  righteous 
indignation  when  he  turned  over  the  tables  in  the 

 

129 

temple  and  drove  out  the  thieving  moneychangers.  i 
wanted to march up there, flip a couple of tables over, 
and say, excuse me, june boatwright, but you don't even 
know met. 

"let's see if we can help her," august said as june 

disappeared from my line of sight. "we owe her that." 

"i  don't  see  that  we  owe  her  anything,"  june 
said.  a  door slammed.  august  flipped off  the light and 
let out a sigh that floated into the darkness. 

i  walked  back  toward  the  honey  house,  feeling 
ashamed  that  august  had  seen  through  my  hoax  but 
relieved,  too,  that  she  wasn't  planning  on  calling  the 
police or sending me back—yet. 

yet, she'd said. 
mostly  i  felt  resentment  at  june's  attitude.  as  i  
squatted on the grass at the edge of the woods, the pee 
felt hot between my legs. i watched it puddle in the dirt, 
the  smell  of  it  rising  into  the  night.  there  was  no  
difference  between  my  piss  and  june's.  that's  what  i 
thought when i looked at the dark circle on the ground. 
piss was piss. 
• • • 
every  evening  after  supper  we  sat  in  their  tiny 
den  around  the  television  set  with  the  ceramic  bee 
planter on top. you could hardly see the screen for the 

 

130 

philodendron  vines  that  dangled  around  the  news 
pictures. 

i liked the way walter cronkite looked, with his 
black glasses and his voice that knew everything worth 
knowing. here was a man who was not against books, 
that was plain. take everything t. ray was not, shape it 
into a person, and you would get walter cronkite. 

he  filled  us  in  on  an  integration  parade  in  st. 
augustine that got attacked by a mob of white people, 
about white vigilante groups, fire hoses, and teargas. we 
got  all  the  totals.  three  civil  rights  workers  killed.  two 
bomb  blasts.  three  negro  students  chased  with  ax 
handles. 

since  mr.  johnson  signed  that  law,  it  was  like  
somebody  had  ripped  the  side  seams  out  of  american 
life. we watched the lineup of governors coming on the 
tv screen asking for "calm and reason." 

august said she was afraid it was only a matter of 
time before we saw things like that happen right here in 
tiburon. 

i  felt  white  and  self-conscious  sitting  there, 
especially  with  june  in  the  room.  self-conscious  and 
ashamed. 

usually  may  didn't  watch,  but  one  night  she 
joined us, and midway through she started to hum "oh! 
susanna." she was upset over a negro man named mr. 

 

131 

raines, who was killed by a shotgun from a passing car 
in georgia. they showed a picture of his widow, holding 
her children, and suddenly may started to sob. of course 
everybody jumped up like she was an unpinned grenade 
and tried to quiet her, but it was too late. 

may  rocked  back  and  forth,  slapping  her  arms 
and scratching at her face. she tore open her blouse so 
the pale yellow  buttons  went flying  like popped corn.  i 
had never seen her like this, and it frightened me. 

august and june each took one of may's elbows 
and  guided  her  through  the  door  in  a  movement  so 
smooth  it  was  plain  they'd  done  it  before.  a  few 
moments later i heard water filling the claw footed tub 
where  twice  i'd  bathed  in  honey  water.  one  of  the 
sisters  had  put  a  pair  of  red  socks  on  two  of  the  tub's  
feet—who  knows  why.  i  supposed  it  was  may,  who 
didn't need a reason. 
rosaleen  and 

i  crept  to  the  door  of  the 
bathroom.  it  was  cracked  open  enough  for  us  to  see 
may sitting in the tub in a little cloud of steam, hugging 
her  knees.  june  scooped  up  handfuls  of  water  and 
drizzled them slowly across may's back. her crying had 
eased off now into sniffling. 

august's  voice  came  from  behind  the  door. 
"that's right, may. let all that misery slide right off you. 
just let it go." 

 

132 

each night after the news, we all knelt down on 
the rug in the parlor before black mary and said prayers 
to  her,  or  rather  the  three  sisters  and  i  knelt  and  
rosaleen  sat  on  a  chair.  august,  june,  and  may  called 
the  statue  "our  lady  of  chains,"  for  no  reason  that  i  
could see. 

hail  mary,  full  of  grace,  the  lord  is  with  thee.  

blessed art thou among women… 

the  sisters  held  strands  of  wooden  beads  and 
moved them in their fingers. in the beginning rosaleen 
refused  to  join  in,  but  soon  she  was  going  right  along 
with the rest of us. i had the words memorized after the 
first  evening.  that's  because  we  said  the  same  thing 
over and over till it went on repeating itself in my head 
long after i stopped mouthing it. 

it was  some kind  of catholic  saying, but  when i 
asked august if they were catholic, she said, "well, yes 
and no.  my  mother was  a  good catholic—she went to 
mass  twice  a  week  at  st.  mary's  in  richmond,  but  my  
father was an orthodox eclectic." 

i  had  no 

idea  what  sort  of  denomination 
orthodox  eclectic  was,  but  i  nodded  like  we  had  a  big 
group of them back in sylvan. she said, "may and june 
and i take our mother's catholicism and mix in our own 
ingredients. i'm not sure what you call it, but it suits us." 

 

133 

when we finished saying hail mary about three 
hundred  times,  we  said  our  personal  prayers  silently, 
which was kept to a minimum, since our knees would be 
killing  us  by  then.  i  shouldn't  complain,  since  it  was 
nothing  compared  to  kneeling  on  the  martha  whites. 
finally  the  sisters  would  cross  themselves  from  their 
foreheads to their navels, and it would be over. 

one evening, after they had crossed themselves 
and everyone had left the room but me and august, she 
said, "lily, if you ask mary's help, she'll give it." 

i didn't know what to say to that, so i shrugged. 
she motioned me to sit next to her in the rocking chair. 
"i  want  to  tell  you  a  story,"  she  said.  "it's  a  story  our 
mother used to tell us when we got tired of our chores 
or out of sorts with our lives." 

"i'm not tired of my chores," i said. 
"i know, but it's a good story. just listen." 
i  situated  myself  in  the  chair  and  rocked  back 
and forth, listening to the creaking sounds that rocking 
chairs are famous for. 

"a long time ago, across the world in germany, 
there was a young nun named beatrix who loved mary. 
she got sick and tired of being a nun, though, what with 
all the chores she had to do and the rules she had to go 
by. so one night when it got too much for her, she took 
off  her  nun outfit, folded  it  up, and laid  it  on  her  bed. 

 

134 

then  she  crawled  out  the  convent  window  and  ran 
away." 

okay, i could see where we were headed. 
"she  thought she was  in for  a wonderful  time," 

august said. 

"but  life  wasn't  what  she  thought  it'd  be  for  a 
runaway  nun.  she  roamed  around  feeling  lost,  begging 
in the streets. after a while she wished she could return 
to  the  convent,  but  she  knew  they'd  never  take  her 
back." 

we  weren't  talking  about  beatrix  the  nun,  that 

was plain as day. we were talking about me. 

"what  happened  to  her?"  i  asked,  trying  to 

sound interested. 

"well,  one  day,  after  years  of  wandering  and 
suffering, she disguised herself and went back to her old 
convent,  wanting  to  visit  one  last  time.  she  went  into 
the  chapel  and  asked  one  of  her  old  sisters,  'do  you 
remember the nun beatrix, who ran away?"' 

"what do you mean?"' the sister said. "the nun 
beatrix didn't run away. why, there she is over near the 
altar, sweeping." well, you can imagine how this floored 
the  real  beatrix.  she  marched  over  to  the  sweeping 
woman to get a look at her and discovered it was none 
other  than  mary.  mary  smiled  at  beatrix,  then  led  her  
back to her room and gave her back her nun outfit. you 

 

135 

see,  lily,  all  that  time  mary  had  been  standing  in  for 
her." 

the creaking in my rocker died away as i slowed 
to a stop. just what was august trying to say? that mary 
would  stand  in  for  me  back  home  in  sylvan  so  t.  ray  
wouldn't  notice  i  was  gone?  that  was  too  outlandish 
even for the catholics. i think she was telling me, i know 
you've  run  away—everybody  gets  the  urge  to  do  that 
some time—but sooner or later you'll want to go home. 

just ask mary for help. 
i excused myself, glad to be out of the spotlight. 
after that i started asking mary for her special help—not 
to take me home, though, like the poor nun beatrix. no, 
i asked her to see to it that i never went back. i asked 
her to draw a curtain around the pink house so no one 
would ever find us. i asked this daily, and i sure couldn't 
get over that it seemed to be working. no one knocked 
on the door and dragged us off to jail. mary had made us 
a curtain of protection. 

• • • 
on  our  first  friday  evening  there,  after  prayers 
were finished and orange and pink swirls still hung in the 
sky from sunset, i went with august to the bee yard. 

i hadn't been out to the hives before, so to start 
off  she  gave  me  a  lesson  in  what  she  called  "bee  yard 
etiquette." she  reminded me  that  the world was really 

 

136 

one  big  bee  yard,  and  the  same  rules  worked  fine  in  
both places: don't be afraid, as no life-loving bee wants 
to  sting  you.  still,  don't  be  an  idiot;  wear  long  sleeves 
and  long  pants.  don't  swat.  don't  even  think  about 
swatting. if you feel angry, whistle. anger agitates, while 
whistling melts a bee's temper. act like you know what 
you're doing, even if you don't. above all, send the bees 
love.  every  little  thing  wants  to  be  loved.  august  had 
been  stung  so  many  times  she  had  immunity.  they 
barely  hurt  her.  in  fact,  she  said,  stings  helped  her 
arthritis, but since i didn't have arthritis, i should cover 
up. she made me put on one of her long-sleeved white 
shirts, then placed one of the white helmets on my head 
and adjusted the netting. 

if this was a man's world, a  veil took the rough 
beard  right  off  it.  everything  appeared  softer,  nicer. 
when i walked behind august in my bee veil, i felt like a 
moon floating behind a night cloud. 

she  kept  48  hives  strewn  through  the  woods 
around the pink house, and another 280 were parceled 
out on various farms, in river yards and upland swamps. 
the farmers loved her bees, thanks to all the pollinating 
they  did,  how  they  made  the  watermelons  redder  and 
the  cucumbers  bigger.  they  would  have  welcomed  her 
bees for  free, but august paid every one of them with 
five gallons of honey. 

 

137 

she was constantly checking on her hives, driving 
her old flatbed truck from one end of the county to the 
other.  the  "honey wagon"  was what  she  called  it.  bee 
patrol was what she did in it. 

i  watched  her  load  the  red  wagon,  the  one  i'd  
seen  in  the  back  yard,  with  brood  frames,  those  little 
slats that slip down in the hives for the bees to deposit 
honey on. 

"we have to make sure the queen has plenty of 
room  to  lay  her  eggs,  or  else  we'll  get  a  swarm,"  she 
said. 

"what does that mean, a swarm?" 
"well,  if  you  have  a  queen  and  a  group  of  
independent minded bees that split off from the rest of 
the hive and look for another place to live, then you've 
got
somewhere." 

 they  usually  cluster

 a  swarm.

 on  a  limb  

it was clear she didn't like swarms. 
"so,"  she  said,  getting down  to  business, "what 
we have to do is take out the frames filled with honey 
and put in empty ones." 

august pulled the wagon while i walked behind it 
carrying the smoker stuffed with pine straw and tobacco 
leaves.  zach  had  placed  a  brick  on  top  of  each  hive 
telling august what to do. if the brick was at the front, it 
meant  the  colony  had  nearly  filled  the  combs  and 

 

138 

needed another super. if the brick was at the back, there 
were problems like wax moths or ailing queens. turned 
on its side, the brick announced a happy bee family, no 
ozzie, just harriet and her ten thousand daughters. 

august  struck  a  match  and  lit  the  grass  in  the  
smoker. i watched her face flare with light, then recede 
into the dimness. she waved the bucket, sending smoke 
into the hive. the smoke, she said, worked better than a 
sedative. 

still,  when  august  removed  the  lids,  the  bees 
poured out in thick black ropes, breaking into strands, a 
flurry  of  tiny  wings  moving  around  our  faces.  the  air 
rained bees, and i sent them love, just like august said. 

she  pulled  out  a  brood  frame,  a  canvas  of 
whirling blacks and grays, with rubbings of silver. "there 
she is, lily, see her?" said august. "that's the queen, the 
large one." 

i made  a curtsy like people do for the queen of 

england, which made august laugh. 

i wanted to make her love me so she would keep 
me  forever.  if  i  could  make  her  love  me,  maybe  she  
would forget about beatrix the nun going home and let 
me stay. 

• • • 
when  we  walked  back  to  the  house,  darkness 
fireflies  sparked  around  our 

in  and 

had  settled 

 

139 

shoulders.  i  could  see  rosaleen  and  may  through  the 
kitchen window finishing the dishes. 

august and i sat in collapsible lawn chairs beside 
a crepe myrtle that kept dropping blossoms all over the 
ground.  cello music  swelled  out  from  the house,  rising 
higher  and  higher  until  it  lifted  off  the  earth,  sailing 
toward venus. 

i could see how such music drew the ghosts out 
of  dying  people,  giving  them  a  ride  to  the  next  life.  i  
wished june's music could've seen my mother out. 

i  gazed  at  the  stone  wall

 that  edged  the  

backyard. 

"there are pieces of paper in the wall out there," 

i said, as if august didn't know this. 

"yes, i know. it's may's wall. she made it herself." 
"may did?" i tried to picture her mixing cement, 

carrying rocks around in her apron. 

"she gets a lot of the stones from the river that 
runs through the woods back there. she's been working 
on it ten years or more." 

so  that's  where  she  got  her  big  muscles—rock 

lifting. "what are all those scraps of paper stuck in it?" 

"oh,  it's  a  long  story,"  august  said.  "i  guess 

you've noticed—may is special." 

"she  sure  does  get  upset  easy,"  i  said.  "that's 
because may takes in things differently than the rest of 

 

140 

us  do."  august  reached  over  and  laid  her  hand  on  my 
arm. "see, lily, when you and i hear about some misery 
out there, it might make us feel bad for a while, but it 
doesn't wreck our whole world. it's like we have a built-
in protection around our hearts that keeps the pain from 
overwhelming  us.  but  may—she  doesn't  have  that. 
everything  just  comes  into  her—all  the  suffering  out 
there—and she feels as if it's happening to her. she can't 
tell the difference." 

did  this  mean  if  i  told  may  about  t.  ray's  
mounds of grits, his dozens of small cruelties, about my 
killing  my  mother—that  hearing  it,  she  would  feel 
everything  i  did?  i  wanted  to  know  what  happened 
when two people felt it. would it divide the hurt in two, 
make  it  lighter  to  bear,  the  way  feeling  someone's  joy 
seemed to double it? 

from 

rosaleen's  voice  drifted 

the  kitchen 
window,  followed  by  may's  laughter.  may  sounded  so 
normal  and  happy  right  then,  i  couldn't  imagine  how 
she'd gotten the way she was—one minute laughing and 
the next overrun with everybody's misery. the last thing 
i wanted was to be like that, but i didn't want to be like 
t. ray either, immune to everything but his own selfish 
life. i didn't know which was worse. 

"was she born like that?" i asked. 
"no, she was a happy child at first." 

141 

 

"then what happened to her?" 
august focused her eyes on the stone wall. "may 
had a twin. our sister april. the two of them were like 
one soul sharing two bodies. i never saw anything like it. 
if april got a toothache, may's gum would plump up red 
and swollen just like april's. only one time did our father 
use a belt strap on april, and i swear to you, the welts 
rose  on  may's  legs,  too.  those  two  had  no  separation 
between them." 

"the  first  day  we  were  here  may  told  us  that 

april died." 

"and  that's  when  it  all  started  with  may,"  she 
said,  then  looked  at  me  like  she  was  trying  to  decide 
whether to go on. "it's not a pretty story." 

"my  story's  not  pretty  either,"  i  said,  and  she  

smiled. 

"well,  when  april  and  may  were  eleven,  they 
walked  to  the  market  with  a  nickel  each  to  buy  an  ice  
cream.  they'd  seen  the  white  children  in  there  licking 
their cones and looking at cartoon books. the man who 
owned  the  market  gave  them  the  cones  but  said  they 
had to go outside to eat them. april was headstrong and 
told him she wanted to look at the cartoon books. she 
argued with the man for her own way, like she used to 
do  with  father,  and  finally  the  man  took  her  arm  and 
pulled her to the door, and her ice cream dropped to the 

 

142 

floor. she came home screaming that it wasn't fair. our 
father  was  the  only  colored  dentist  in  richmond,  and 
he'd  seen  more  than  his  share  of  unfairness.  he  told 
april, "nothing's fair in this world. you might as well get 
that straight right now."" 

i  was  thinking  how  i  myself  had  gotten  that 
straight  long  before  i  was  eleven.  i  blew  a  puff  of  air  
across  my  face,  bending  my  neck  to  behold  the  big 
dipper. june's music poured out, serenading us. 

"i think most children might have let that roll on 
by, but it did something to april," august said. "she got 
deflated about life,  i suppose  you'd  say.  it opened  her 
eyes  to  things  she  might  not  have  noticed,  being  so 
young.  she  started  having  stretches  when  she  didn't 
want to go to school or do anything. by the time she was 
thirteen,  she  was  having  terrible  depressions,  and  of 
course the whole time, whatever she was  feeling, may 
was feeling. and then, when april was fifteen, she took 
our father's shotgun and killed herself." 

i  hadn't  expected  that.  i  sucked  in  my  breath, 

then felt my hand go up and cover my mouth. 

"i  know,"  said  august.  "it's  terrible  to  hear  
something  like  that."  she  paused  a  moment.  "when 
april  died,  something  in  may  died,  too.  she  never  was 
normal after that. it seemed like the world itself became 
may's twin sister." 

 

143 

august's 

face  was  blending 

into  the  tree 

shadows. i slid up in my chair so i could still see her. 

"our  mother  said  she  was  like  mary,  with  her 
heart  on  the  outside  of  her  chest.  mother  was  good 
about taking care of her, but when she died, it fell to me 
and june. we tried for years to get may some help. she 
saw  doctors, but  they  didn't  have  any idea  what  to do 
with  her  except  put  her  away.  so  june  and  i  came  up  
with this idea of a wailing wall." 

"a what kind of wall?" 
"wailing wall," she said again. "like they have in 
jerusalem.  the jewish people go  there to mourn. it's a 
way for them to deal with their suffering. see, they write 
their  prayers  on  scraps  of  paper  and  tuck  them  in  the 
wall." 

"and that's what may does?" 
august nodded. "all those bits of paper you see 
out there stuck between the stones are things may has 
written down—all the heavy feelings she carries around. 
it seems like the only thing that helps her." 

i looked in the direction of the wall, invisible now 

in the darkness. 

birmingham, sept 15, four little angels dead. 
"poor may," i said. 

 

144 

"yes," said august. "poor may." and we sat in the 
sorrow  for  a  while,  until  the  mosquitoes  collected 
around us and chased us indoors. 

• • • 
in the honey house rosaleen was on her cot with 
the  lights  out  and  the  fan  going  full  blast.  i  stripped 
down  to  my  panties  and  sleeveless  top,  but  it  was  still  
too  hot  to  move.  my  chest  hurt  from  feeling  things.  i  
wondered  if  t.  ray  was  pacing  the  floors  feeling  as  
injured as i hoped he did. maybe he was telling himself 
what a rotten excuse for a father he was for not treating 
me better, but i doubted it. thinking up ways to kill me 
was more like it. 

i  turned  my  pillow  over  and  over  for  the 
coolness, thinking about may and her wall and what the 
world had come to that a person needed something like 
that.  it  gave  me  the  willies  to  think  what  might  be  
stuffed  in  among  those  rocks.  the  wall  brought  to  my 
mind the bleeding slabs of meat rosaleen used to cook, 
the gashes she made up and down them, stuffing them 
with pieces of wild, bitter garlic. 

the  worst  thing  was  lying  there  wanting  my 
mother.  that's  how it had  always  been; my  longing for 
her nearly always came late at night when my guard was 
down. i tossed on the sheets, wishing i could crawl into 
bed  with  her  and  smell  her  skin.  i  wondered:  had  she 

 

145 

worn  thin  nylon  gowns  to  bed?  did  she  bobby-pin  her 
hair?  i  could  just  see  her,  propped  in  bed.  my  mouth 
twisted  as  i pictured  myself  climbing in beside her  and 
putting my head against her breast. i would put it right 
over  her  beating  heart  and  listen.  mama,  i  would  say. 
and she would look down at me and say, baby, i'm right 
here. 

i could hear rosaleen trying to turn over on her 

cot. "you awake?" i said. 

"who can sleep in this oven?" she said. 
i wanted to say, you can, as i'd seen her sleeping 
that day outside the frogmore stew general store and 
restaurant, and it had been at least this hot. she had a 
fresh  band-aid  on  her  forehead.  earlier,  august  had 
boiled  her  tweezers  and  fingernail  scissors  in  a  pot  on 
the  stove  and  used  them  to  pluck  out  rosaleen's 
stitches. 

"how's your head?" 
"my head is just fine." the words came out like 

stiff little jabs in the air. 

"are you mad or something?" 
"why would i be mad? just "cause you spend all 
your  time  with  august  now  ain't  no  reason  for  me  to  
care.  you  pick  who  you  want  to  talk  with,  it's  not  my  
business." 

i couldn't believe it; rosaleen sounded jealous. 

 

146 

"i don't spend all my time with her." 
"pretty much," she said. 
"well, what do you expect? i work in the honey 

house with her. i have to spend time with her." 

"what about tonight? you out there working on 

honey sitting on the lawn?" 

"we were just talking." 
"yeah,  i  know,"  she  said,  and  then  she  rolled 
toward the wall, turning her back into a great hump of 
silence. 

"rosaleen, don't act like that. august might know 

things about my mother." 

she  raised  up  on  her  elbow  and  looked  at  me. 
"lily, your mama's gone," she said softly. "and she ain't 
coming back." 

i  sat  straight  up.  "how  do  you  know  she  isn't 
alive right in this very town? t. ray could've lied about 
her being dead, just like he lied about her leaving me." 

"oh, lily. girl. you got to stop all this." 
"i feel her here," i said. "she's been here, i know 

it." 

"maybe  she  was.  i  can't  say.  i  just  know  some 

things are better left alone." 

"what  do  you  mean?  that  i  shouldn't  find  out 

what i can about my own mother?" 

 

147 

"what if—-" she paused and rubbed the back of 
her  neck.  "what  if  you  find  out  something  you  don't 
wanna know?" 

what i heard her say was your mother left you, 
lily.  let  it  alone.  i  wanted  to  yell  how  stupid  she  was,  
but the words bunched in my throat. i started hiccuping 
instead. 

"you think t. ray was telling me the truth about 

her leaving me, don't you?" 

"i don't have any idea about that," rosaleen said. 

"i just don't want you getting yourself hurt." 

i lay back on the bed. in the silence  my hiccups 

ricocheted around the room. 

"hold  your breath, pat  your head, and rub your 

tummy," rosaleen said. 

i  ignored  her.  eventually  i  heard  her  breathing 

shift to a deeper place. 

i  pulled  on  my  shorts  and  sandals  and  crept  to 
the desk where august filled honey orders. i tore a piece 
of paper from a tablet and wrote my mother's name on 
it. deborah owens. 

when  i  looked  outside,  i  knew  i  would  have  to 
make my way by starlight. i crept across the grass, back 
to  the  edge  of  the  woods,  to  may's  wall.  hiccuping  all  
the  way.  placing  my  hands  on  the  stones,  all  i  wanted 
was not to ache so much. 

 

148 

i wanted to let go of my feelings for a little while, 
to pull in my moat bridge. i pressed the paper with her 
name into a cranny that seemed right for her, giving her 
to  the  wailing  wall.  somewhere  along  the  way  my  
hiccups disappeared. 

i  sat  on  the  ground  with  my  back  against  the  
stones and my head tilted back so i could see the stars 
with all the spy satellites mixed in. maybe one of them 
was taking my picture this very minute. they could spot 
me even in the dark. nothing was safe. i would have to 
remember that. 

i started thinking maybe i should find out what i 
could  about  my  mother,  before  t.  ray  or  the  police 
came for us. but where to start? i couldn't just pull out 
the  black  mary  picture  and  show  it  to  august  without 
the truth wrecking everything, and she would decide—
might decide, would decide, i couldn't say—that she was 
obliged to call t. ray to come get me. and if she knew 
that rosaleen was a true fugitive, wouldn't she have to 
call the police? 

the night seemed like an inkblot i had  to figure 
out.  i sat there and  studied the darkness, trying to see 
through it to some sliver of light. 
 

 

 

149 

chapter six 

the  queen  must  produce  some  substance 
that  attracts  the  workers  and  that  can  be 
obtained  from  her  only  by  direct  contact.  this 
substance evidently stimulates the normal working 
behavior in the hive. this chemical messenger has 
been  called  "queen  substance."  experiments  have 
shown  that  the  bees  obtain  it  directly  from  the 
body of the queen. 

—man and insects 

 

the  next  morning,  inside  the  honey  house,  i 
woke  to  banging  in  the  yard.  when  i  pulled  myself  off 
the cot and wandered outside, i found the tallest negro 
man i'd  ever  seen  working  on  the truck,  bent over  the 
motor, tools scattered around his feet. june handed him 
wrenches  and  what-have-you,  cocking  her  head  and 
beaming at him. 

 

150 

in  the  kitchen  may  and  rosaleen  were  working 
on pancake batter. i didn't like pancakes that much, but i 
didn't  say  so.  i  was  just  thankful  it  wasn't  grits.  after  
kneeling  on  them  half  your  life,  you  don't  care  to  eat  
them. 

the trash can  was  full of  banana peels,  and the 
electric percolator bubbled into the tiny glass nozzle on 
top of it. bloop, bloop. i loved the way  it sounded, the 
way it smelled. 

"who's the man out there?" i asked. 
"that's neil," said may. "he's sweet on june." 
"it looks to me like june is  sweet on him, too." 

"yeah, but she won't say so," said may. 

"she's kept that poor man strung along for years. 

won't marry him and won't let him go." 

may drizzled batter on the griddle in the shape of 

a big l. 

"this one's yours," she said. l for lily. 
rosaleen set the table and warmed the honey in 
a bowl of hot water. i poured orange juice into the jelly 
glasses. 

"how  come  june  won't  get  married  to  him?"  i  

asked. 

"she was supposed to get married to somebody 
else a long time ago," said may. "but he didn't show up 
for the wedding." 

 

151 

i looked at rosaleen, afraid this situation of jilted 
love might be unfortunate enough to send may into one 
of  her  episodes,  but  she  was  intent  on  my  pancake.  it 
struck me for the first time how odd it was that none of 
them  were  married.  three  unmarried  sisters 
living 
together  like  this.  i  heard  rosaleen  make  a  sound  like 
hmmrnph, and i knew she was thinking about her own 
sorry  husband,  wishing  he  hadn't  shown  up  for  their 
ceremony. 

"june  swore  off  men  and  said  she  would  never 
get married, and then she met neil when he came to be 
the  new  principal  at  her  school.  i  don't  know  what 
happened  to  his  wife,  but he  didn't  have  one  anymore 
after  he  moved  here.  he  has  tried  every  which  way  to  
get  june  to  marry  him,  but  she  won't  do  it.  me  and  
august can't convince her either." 

a wheeze welled up from may's chest, and then 

out came "oh! susanna." here we go. 

"lord, not again," said rosaleen. 
"i'm sorry," may said. "i just can't help it." 
"why don't you go out to the wall?" i said, prying 

the spatula out of her hand. "it's okay." 

"yeah,"  rosaleen  told  her.  "you  do  what  you 
gotta do." we watched from the screen door as may cut 
past june and neil. 

 

152 

a  few  minutes  later  june  came  in  with  neil  
behind  her.  i  worried  that  his  head  wouldn't  clear  the 
door. 

"what  started  may  off?"  june wanted  to  know. 
her  eyes  followed  a  roach  that  darted  beneath  the 
refrigerator. "you didn't step on a roach in front of her, 
did you?" 

"no," i said. "we didn't even see a roach." 
she opened the cabinet under the sink  and dug 
into  the  back  for  a  pump  can  of  bug  killer.  i  thought 
about explaining to her my mother's ingenious method 
of  ridding  the  house  of  roaches—cracker  crumbs  and 
marshmallow—but then i thought, this is june, forget it. 

"well, what upset her, then?" june asked. 
i hated to come out and say it with neil standing 
right there, but rosaleen didn't have any problem with 
it. 

"she's upset you won't marry neil." 
i  had  never  considered  until  then  that  colored 
people  could blush, or  maybe it  was anger that  turned 
june's face and ears such a dark plum color. 

neil  laughed.  "see  there.  you  should  marry  me 

and quit upsetting your sister." 

"oh,  get  out of  here,"  she  said,  and gave him a 

push. 

 

153 

"you promised me pancakes, and i'm gonna have 
them,"  he  said.  he  wore  blue  jeans  and  an  undershirt 
with  grease  smears  on  it,  along  with  horn-rimmed 
glasses. he looked like a very studious mechanic. 

he smiled at me and then rosaleen. "so are you 

gonna introduce me or keep me in the dark?" 

i  have  noticed  that  if  you  look  carefully  at  
people's eyes the first five seconds they look at you, the 
truth  of  their  feelings  will  shine  through  for  just  an 
instant  before  it  flickers  away.  june's  eyes  turned  dull 
and hard when she looked at me. 

"this is lily and rosaleen," she said. 
"they're visiting for a while." 
"where do you come from?" he asked me. this is 
the  number  one  most-asked  question  in  all  of  south 
carolina. we want to know if you are one of us, if your 
cousin  knows  our  cousin,  if  your  little  sister  went  to 
school  with  our  big  brother,  if  you  go  to  the  same 
baptist church as our ex-boss. we are looking for ways 
our stories fit together. it was rare, though, for negroes 
to ask white people where they're from, because there 
was nothing much to be gained from it, as their stories 
weren't that likely to link up. 

"spartanburg  county,"  i  said,  having  to  pause 

and remember what i'd said earlier. 

"and you?" he said to rosaleen. 

 

154 

she stared at the copper jell-o molds that hung 
on either side of the window over the sink. "same place 
as lily." 

"what's that burning?" said june. 
smoke  poured  off  the  griddle.  the  l-shaped 
pancake had burned to a crisp. june yanked the spatula 
from  my  fingers,  scraped  up  the  mess,  and  dropped  it 
into the trash. 

"how  long  are  you  planning  on  staying?"  neil 

asked. 

june stared at me. waiting. her lips pinched tight 

along her teeth. 

"a  while  longer,"  i  answered,  looking  over  into 

the garbage c. l for lily. 

i could feel the questions gathering in him, knew 

i could not face them. 

"i'm not hungry," i said, and walked out the back 

door. 

crossing the back porch, i heard rosaleen say to 

him, "have you registered yourself to vote?" 

• • • 
on  sunday  i  thought  they  would  go  to  church, 
but no, they held a special service in the pink house, and 
people  came  to  them.  it  was  a  group  called  the  
daughters of mary, which august had organized. 

 

155 

the daughters of mary started showing up in the 
parlor before 10:00 a.m. first was an old woman named 
queenie  and  her  grown  daughter,  violet.  they  were 
dressed  alike in  bright yellow  skirts  and white  blouses, 
though  they  wore  different  hats,  at  least.  next  came 
lunelle,  mabelee,  and  cressie,  who  wore  the  fanciest 
hats i'd ever laid eyes on. 

it turned out lunelle was a hatmaker without the 
least bit of shyness. i'm talking about purple felt the size 
of  a  sombrero  with  fake  fruit  on  the  back.  that  was 
lunelle's. 

mabelee  wore  a  creation  of  tiger  fur  wrapped 
with gold fringe, but it was cressie who carried the day 
in a  crimson smokestack with black netting and ostrich 
feathers. 

if this was not enough, they wore clip-on earbobs 
of  various  colored  rhinestones  and  circles  of  rouge  on 
their brown cheeks. i thought they were beautiful. 

in addition to  all  these daughters, it turned out 
mary had one son besides jesus, a man named otis hill, 
with stubby teeth, in an oversize navy suit, so technically 
the  group  was  the  daughters  and  son  of  mary.  he'd 
come  with  his  wife,  who  was  known  to  everyone  as 
sugar-girl.  she  wore  a  white  dress,  turquoise  cotton 
gloves, and an emerald green turban on her head. 

 

156 

august  and  june,  hatless,  gloveless,  earbobless, 
looked  practically  poverty-stricken  next  to  them,  but 
may, good old may, had tied on a  bright blue hat with 
the brim up on one side and down on the other. 

august had brought in chairs and arranged them 
in a semicircle facing the wooden statue of mary. when 
we  were  all seated,  she  lit  the candle and june  played 
the cello. we said the hail marys together, queenie and 
violet  moving  strings  of  wooden  beads  through  their 
fingers. 

august  stood  up and said  she  was  glad me  and 
rosaleen were with them; then she opened a bible and 
read,  "and  mary  said…  behold,  from  henceforth  all 
generations shall call me blessed. for he that is mighty 
hath  done  to  me  great  things…  he  hath  scattered  the 
proud… he hath put down the mighty from their seats, 
and  exalted  them  of  low  degree.  he  hath  filled  the 
hungry  with  good  things;  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent 
empty away." 

laying the bible in her chair, she said, "it's been a 
while since we've told the story  of our lady of chains, 
and since we have visitors who've never heard the story 
of our statue, i thought we'd tell it again." 

one thing i was starting to understand was that 

august loved to tell a good story. 

 

157 

"really,  it's  good  for  all  of  us  to  hear  it  again," 
she said. "stories have to be told or they die, and when 
they die, we can't remember who we are or why we're 
here." 

cressie  nodded,  making  the  ostrich  feathers 
wave through the air so you had the impression of a real 
bird in the room. "that's right. tell the story," she said. 

august  pulled  her  chair  close  to  the  statue  of 
black mary and sat facing us. when she began, it didn't 
sound like august talking at all but like somebody talking 
through her, someone from another time and place. all 
the  while  her  eyes  looked  off  toward  the  window,  like 
she was seeing the drama play out in the sky. 

"well,"  she  said,  "back  in  the  time  of  slaves, 
when  the  people  were  beaten  down  and  kept  like 
property,  they  prayed  every  day  and  every  night  for 
deliverance." 

"on  the  islands  near  charleston,  they would  go 
to the praise house and sing and pray, and every single 
time someone would ask the lord to send them rescue. 
to send them consolation. to send them freedom." 

i could tell she had repeated those opening lines 
a  thousand  times,  that  she  was  saying  them  the  exact  
way she'd heard them coming from the lips of some old 
woman,  who'd  heard  them  from  the  lips  of  an  even 
older  one,  the  way  they  came  out  like  a  song,  with  

 

158 

rhythms  that  rocked  us  to  and  fro  till  we  had  left  the  
premises  and  were,  ourselves,  on  the 
islands  of 
charleston looking for rescue. 

"one day," august said, "a slave named obadiah 
was loading bricks onto a boat that would sail down the 
ashley river, when he saw something washed up on the 
bank. coming closer, he saw it was the wooden figure of 
a woman. her body was growing out of a block of wood, 
a black woman with her arm lifted out and her fist balled 
up." 

at this point august stood up and struck the pose 
herself.  she  looked  just  like  the  statue  standing  there, 
her  right  arm  raised  and  her  hand  clutched  into  a  fist. 
she  stayed  like  that  for  a  few  seconds  while  we  sat, 
spellbound. 

"obadiah pulled the figure out of the water," she 
went  on,  "and  struggled  to  set  her  upright.  then  he 
remembered  how  they'd  asked  the  lord  to  send  them 
rescue.  to  send  them  consolation.  to  send  them 
freedom.  obadiah  knew  the  lord  had  sent  this  figure, 
but he didn't know who she was." 

"he knelt down in the marsh mud before her and 
heard her voice speak plain as day in his heart. she said, 
'it's all right. i'm here. i'll be taking care of you now.'" 

this story was ten times better than beatrix the 
nun.  august  glided  back  and  forth  across  the  room  as 

 

159 

she  spoke.  "obadiah  tried  to  pick  up  the  waterlogged 
woman who god had sent to take care of them, but she 
was too heavy, so he went and got two more slaves, and 
between them they carried her to the praise house and 
set her on the hearth." 

"by  the  time  the  next  sunday  came,  everyone 
had heard about the statue  washing up from the  river, 
how  it  had  spoken  to  obadiah.  the  praise  house  was 
filled with people spilling out the door and sitting on the 
window  ledges.  obadiah  told  them  he  knew  the  lord 
god had sent her, but he didn't know who she was." 

"he didn't know who she was!" cried sugar-girl, 
breaking in to the story. then all the daughters of mary 
broke  loose,  saying  over  and  over,  "not  one  of  them 
knew." 
i

 hardly  
recognized for the way she leaned forward in her chair, 
chanting along with them. 

 looked  over  at  rosaleen,

 who  i

when everything had quieted down, august said, 
"now,  the  oldest  of  the  slaves  was  a  woman  named  
pearl.  she  walked  with  a  stick,  and  when  she  spoke, 
everyone  listened.  she  got  to  her  feet  and  said,  "this 
here is the mother of jesus." 

"everyone knew the mother of jesus was named 
mary, and that she'd seen suffering of every kind. that 
she was strong and constant and had a mother's heart. 

 

160 

and here she was, sent to them on the same waters that 
had brought them here in chains. it seemed to them she 
knew everything they suffered." 

i stared at the statue, feeling the fractured place 

in my heart. 

"and  so,"  august  said,  "the  people  cried  and 
danced  and  clapped  their  hands.  they  went  one  at  a 
time  and  touched  their  hands  to  her chest,  wanting  to 
grab on to the solace in her heart." 

"they did this every sunday in the praise house, 
dancing  and  touching  her  chest,  and  eventually  they 
painted a red heart on her breast so the people would 
have a heart to touch." 

"our  lady  filled  their  hearts  with  fearlessness 
and whispered to them plans of escape. the bold ones 
fled, finding their way north, and those who didn't lived 
with  a  raised  fist  in  their  hearts.  and  if  ever  it  grew 
weak, they would only have to touch her heart again." 

"she grew so powerful she became known even 
to  the  master.  one  day  he  hauled  her  off  on  a  wagon 
and chained her in the carriage house. but then, without 
any human help, she escaped during the night and made 
her  way  back  to  the  praise house.  the  master  chained 
her in the barn fifty times, and fifty times she loosed the 
chains  and  went  home.  finally  he  gave  up  and  let  her 
stay there." 

 

161 

the  room  grew  quiet  as  august  stood  there  a 
minute,  letting  everything  sink  in.  when  she  spoke 
again, she raised her  arms out beside her.  "the people 
called  her our lady of  chains. they called her that not 
because she wore chains…" 

"not  because  she  wore  chains,"  the  daughters 

chanted. 

"they called her our lady of chains because she 
broke  them."  june  wedged  the  cello  between  her  legs 
and played "amazing grace," and the daughters of mary 
got  to  their  feet  and  swayed  together  like  colorful 
seaweed  on  the  ocean  floor.  i  thought  this  was  the 
grand  finale,  but  no,  june  switched  over  to  the  piano 
and banged out a jazzed-up version of "go tell it on the 
mountain." that's when august started a conga-line. she 
danced  over  to  lunelle,  who  latched  on  to  august's 
waist.  cressie  hooked  on  to  lunelle,  followed  by 
mabelee, and  off  they  went around the  room,  causing 
cressie to grab hold of her crimson hat. 

when  they  swung  back  by,  queenie  and  violet 
joined them, then sugar-girl.  i wanted  to be  part of it, 
too,  but  i only watched,  and  so  did rosaleen and otis. 
june seemed to play faster and faster. i fanned my face, 
trying to get a little air, feeling light-headed. when the 
dance  ended,  the  daughters  stood  panting  in  a  half 
circle before our lady of chains, and what they did next 

 

162 

took  my  breath  away.  one  at  a  time  they  went  and  
touched the statue's fading red heart. 

queenie  and  her  daughter  went  together  and 
rubbed  their  palms  against  the  wood.  lunelle  pressed 
her  fingers  to  mary's  heart,  then  kissed  each  one  of 
them in a slow, deliberate way, a way that brought tears 
to my eyes. 

otis pressed his forehead to the heart, standing 
there the longest time of them all, head to heart, like he 
was filling up his empty tank. 

june kept playing while each of them came, until 
there  was  only  rosaleen  and  me  left.  may  nodded  to 
june  to  keep  on  with  the  music  and  took  rosaleen's 
hand,  pulling  her  to  our  lady  of  chains,  so  even 
rosaleen got to touch mary's heart. 

i wanted to touch her vanishing red heart, too, as 
much  as  anything  i'd  ever  wanted.  as  i  rose  from  my  
chair,  my  head  was  still  swimming  some.  i  walked 
toward black mary with my hand lifted. but just as i was 
about to reach her, june stopped playing. 

she stopped right in the middle of the song, and i 

was left in the silence with my hand stretched out. 

drawing it back, i looked around me, and it was 
like seeing everything through a train's thick window. a 
blur passed before me. a moving wave of color. i am not 
one of you, i thought. my body felt numb. i thought how 

 

163 

nice it would be to grow smaller and smaller—until i was 
a dot of nothing. 

i  heard  august  scolding,  "june,  what  got  into 
you?" but her voice was so distant. i called to the lady of 
chains,  but maybe  i  wasn't  really  saying  her  name out 
loud,  only  hearing  myself  call  on  the  inside.  that's  the 
last i remember. her name echoing through the  empty 
spaces. 

• • • 
when i woke, i was lying on august's bed across 
the  hall  with  an  ice-cold  washcloth  folded  over  my 
forehead and august and rosaleen staring down at me. 
rosaleen  had  pulled  up  the  skirt  of  her  dress  and  was 
fanning me with it, showing most of her thighs. 

"since when have you started fainting?" she said, 
and sat down on the edge of the bed, causing me to roll 
into her side. she scooped me into her arms. for some 
reason  this  caused  my  chest  to  fill  with  more  sadness 
than i could bear, and i wrestled myself free, claiming i 
needed a drink of water. 

"maybe 

it  was  the  heat,"  august  said.  "i 
should've  turned  on  the  fans.  it  must've  been  ninety 
degrees in there." 

"i'm all right," i told them, but to tell the truth, i 
was  bewildered  at  myself.  i  felt  i'd  stumbled  upon  an 
amazing secret —it was possible to close your eyes and 

 

164 

exit  life  without  actually  dying.  you  just  had  to  faint. 
only i didn't know how to make it happen, how to pull 
the  plug  so  i  could  drain  away  when  i  needed  to.  my 
fainting spell had broken up the daughters of mary and 
sent may to the wailing wall. june had gone upstairs to 
her  room  and  locked  the  door,  while  the  daughters 
huddled in the kitchen. 

we  chalked  it  up  to  heat.  heat,  we  said.  heat 

would make a person do strange things. 

• • • 
you should have seen how august and rosaleen 
fussed over me the rest of the evening. you want some 
root  beer,  lily?  how  about  a  feather  pillow?  here, 
swallow this spoon of honey. 

we sat in the den, where i ate supper off a tray, 
which was a privilege in itself. june was still in her room, 
not answering august's calls at the door, and may, who 
wasn't allowed near the tv because she'd already spent 
way too much time today at the wall, was in the kitchen 
clipping recipes from mccall's magazine. 

on  the  television  mr.  cronkite  said  they  were 
going  to  send  a  rocket  ship  to  the  moon.  "on  july 
twenty-eighth, the united states of america will launch 
ranger  seven  from  cape  kennedy,  florida,"  he  said.  it 
was going to take a 253,665-mile flight before it crash-

 

165 

landed  onto  the  moon.  the  whole  point  was  to  take 
pictures of the surface and send them back. 

"well,  baby  jesus,"  said  rosaleen.  "a  rocket  to 
the  moon."  august  shook  her  head.  "next  they'll  be 
walking around up there." 

we  had  all  thought  president  kennedy  was  off 
his  rocker  when  he  declared  we'd  land  a  man  on  the 
moon.  the  sylvan  newspaper  had  called  it  a  "luna-tic 
vision." i took the article to class for the current-events 
bulletin board. 

we all said, a man on the moon. right. 
but  you  can  never  underestimate  the  power  of 
the 
cutthroat  competition.  we  wanted 
russians—that was what made the world go around for 
us. now it looked like we would. august cut off the tv 
set. "i need some air." 

to  beat 

we all went, rosaleen and august holding on to 

my elbows in case i started to keel over again. 

it  was  the  in-between  time,  before  day  leaves 
and  night  comes,  a  time  i've  never  been  partial  to  
because  of  the  sadness  that 
in  the  space 
between  going  and  coming.  august  gazed  at  the  sky 
where the moon was rising, large and ghostly silver. 

lingers 

"look at her good, lily," she said, "'cause you're 

seeing the end of something." 

 

166 

"yes,  you  are,  because  as  long  as  people  have 
been on this earth, the moon has been a mystery to us. 
think about it. she is strong enough to pull the oceans, 
and when she dies away, she always comes back again. 
my mama used to tell me our lady lived on the moon 
and that  i should  dance when  her face  was  bright  and 
hibernate when it was dark." 

august  stared  at  the  sky  a  long  moment  and  
then, turning toward the house, said, "now it won't ever 
be  the  same,  not  after  they've  landed  up  there  and 
walked  around  on  her.  she'll  be  just  one  more  big 
science project." 

i  thought  about  the  dream  i'd  had  that  night 
rosaleen  and  i  slept  by  the  pond,  how  the  moon  had 
cracked  to  pieces.  august  disappeared  into  the  house, 
and rosaleen headed for her cot in the honey house, but 
i  stayed  on  and  stared  at  the  sky,  imagining  ranger  7 
blasting away for it. 

i  knew  one  day  i  would  go  back  into  the  parlor  
when  no  one  was  around  and  touch  the  lady's  heart. 
then i would show august the picture of my mother and 
see if the moon broke loose and fell out of the sky. 
 

 

 

167 

chapter seven 

how  did  bees  ever  become  equated  with 
sex? they do not live a riotous sex life themselves. 
a hive suggests cloister more than bordello. 

—the queen must die: and other affairs 
of bees and men 
 
i jumped every time i heard a siren. it might have 
been an ambulance off in the distance or a police chase 
on  television—it  didn't  matter.  part  of  me  was  always 
braced  for  t.  ray  or  mr.  shoe  gaston  to  drive  up  and 
end  my  charmed  life.  we  had  been  at  august's  house 
eight  whole  days.  i  didn't  know  how  long  black  mary 
could keep the curtain drawn. 

on monday morning,  july 3, i was walking back 
to  the  honey  house  after  breakfast  when  i  noticed  a  
strange  black  ford  parked  in  the  driveway.  i  lost  my  
breath  for  a  moment,  till  i  remembered  zach  was  
coming back to work today. 

 

168 

it  would  be  me  and  august  and  zach.  i'm  not 
proud  of  it,  but  i  resented  the  intrusion.  he  was  not 
what  i  expected.  i  found  him  inside  holding  a  honey 
drizzle like a microphone, singing, "i found my thrill on 
blueberry hill." i watched unseen from the doorway, not 
making  a  sound,  but  when  he  launched  into  "viva  las 
vegas,"  slinging  his  hips  around  elvis-style,  i  broke  out 
laughing. 

he whirled around, knocking over a tray of brood 

frames, which made a great big mess all over the floor. 

"i was just singing," he said, like this was news to 

me. 

"who are you anyway?" 
"lily,"  i said. "i'm staying with august and them 

for a while." 

"i'm zachary taylor," he said. 
"zachary taylor was a president," i told him. 
"yeah,  so  i've  heard."  he  fished  out  a  dogtag 
suspended  on  a chain  under  his  shirt and held  it  up to 
my  nose.  "see  right  there.  zachary  lincoln  taylor."  he 
smiled then, and i saw he had a one-side dimple. it's a 
feature that has always gotten to me. 

he  went  and  got  a  towel  and  cleaned  up  the 
floor. "august told me about you being here and helping 
us  out,  but  she  didn't  say  anything  about  you  being… 
white." 

 

169 

"yep, i'm  white, all  right," i said.  "white as  can 

be." 

there  was  nothing  white  about  zachary  lincoln 
taylor.  even  the  whites  of  his  eyes  weren't  exactly 
white. he had broad shoulders and a narrow waist and 
short-cropped  hair  like  most  of  the  negro  boys  wore, 
but  it  was  his  face  i  couldn't  help  staring  at.  if  he  was 
shocked  over  me  being  white,  i  was  shocked  over  him 
being handsome. 

at my school they made fun of colored people's 
lips  and  noses.  i  myself  had  laughed  at  these  jokes, 
hoping to fit in. now i wished i could pen a letter to my 
school  to  be  read  at  opening  assembly  that  would  tell 
them how wrong we'd all been. you should see zachary 
taylor, i'd  say. i  wondered how  august could forget to 
tell him a thing like the fact that i was white. she'd told 
me  plenty  about  him.  i  knew  she  was  his  godmother. 
that his daddy had left him when he was small, that his 
mama worked as a lunchroom lady at the same school 
where  june taught. he was about to be a  junior at the 
black  high  school,  where  he  made  all  a's  and  played 
halfback on the football team. she'd said he ran like the 
wind,  which  might  be  his  ticket  to  a  college  up  north.  
this had struck me as better than i would manage, since 
i was probably headed for beauty school now. 

 

170 

i said, "august went out to  the satterfield farm 
to  check  on  some  hives.  she  said  i  should  help  you  in 
here. what do you want me to do?" 

"grab  some  frames  from  the  hive  boxes  over 

there and help me load the uncapper, i guess." 

"so who do you like best, fats domino or elvis?" i 

asked, dropping in the first frame. 

"miles davis," he said. 
"i don't know who that is." 
"of course you don't. but he's the best trumpet 

player in the world. i'd give anything to play like him." 

"would you give up football?" 
"how do you know i play football?" 
"i know things," i said, and smiled at him. 
"i can see that." he was trying not to smile back. 
i thought, we're going to be friends. 
he flipped the  switch, and the extractor started 
to  spin,  building  speed.  "so  how  come  you're  staying 
here?" 

"me and rosaleen are on our way to virginia to 
live with my aunt. my daddy died in a tractor accident, 
and i haven't had a mother since i was little, so i'm trying 
to  get  to  my  family  up  there  before  i  get  put  in  an  
orphanage or something." 

"but how come you're here?" 

 

171 

"oh, you mean at august's. we were hitchhiking 
and  got  let  out  at  tiburon.  we  knocked  on  august's 
door, and she gave us a bed. that's it." 

he  nodded  like  this  made  some  kind  of  actual 

sense. 

"how  long  have  you  worked  here?"  i  asked, 

happy to change the subject. 

"all  through  high  school.  i  come  after  school 
when  it's  not  football  season,  every  saturday  and  all 
summer.  i  bought  a  car  with  the  money  i  made  last  
year." 

"that ford out there?" 
"yeah, it's a "59 ford fairlane," he said. 
he flipped the switch on the extractor again, and 
the machine groaned while it came to a stop. "come on, 
i'll show you." 

i could see my face in the surface of it. i figured 
he  stayed  up  nights  polishing  it  with  his  undershirts.  i 
walked along giving it the white-glove inspection. 

"you can teach me to drive," i said. 
"not in this car." 
"why not?" 
"because  you  look  like  the  kind  of  girl  who'll 

wreck something for sure." 

 

172 

i turned to face him, ready to defend myself, and 
saw he was grinning. and there was the one-side dimple 
again. 

"for sure," he said. "wreck something for sure." 
• • • 
every day zach and i worked in the honey house. 
august  and  zach  had  already  extracted  most  of  the 
honey  from  her  bee  yards,  but  there  were  still  several 
stacks of supers on pallets sitting around. 

we ran the warmer and caught the wax in a tin 
tub,  then  loaded  the  frames  into  the  extractor  and 
filtered the honey through brandnew nylon hose. august 
liked to keep a little pollen in her honey because it was 
good for people, so we saw to that, too. sometimes we 
broke  off  pieces  of  comb  and  pushed  them  down  into 
the  jars  before  we  filled  them.  you  had  to  make  sure  
they were new combs with no brood eggs in them, since 
nobody wanted to have baby bee larvae in their honey. 

and if we weren't doing all that, we were filling 
candle molds with beeswax and washing mason jars till 
my hands turned stiff as corn husk from detergent. 

the  only  part  of  the  day  i  dreaded  was  dinner, 
when i had to be around june. you'd think anybody who 
played music for dying people would be a nicer person. i 
couldn't  understand  why  she  resented  me  so  much. 

 

173 

somehow  even  me  being  white  and  imposing  on  their 
hospitality didn't seem enough reason. 

"how are things coming with you, lily?" she'd say 
every night at the table. like she'd rehearsed this in the 
mirror. 

i'd  say,  "things  are  coming  fine.  and  how  are 

they coming with you, june?" 

she  would  glance  at  august,  who  would  be 
following  all  this  like  she  was  overcome  with  interest. 
"fine," june would say. 

having  gotten  that  out  of  the  way,  we  would  
shake  out  our  napkins  and  do  our  best  to  ignore  each 
other the rest of the meal. 

i knew  that august  was  trying  to  correct june's 
rudeness toward me, but i wanted to say to her, do you 
think  me  and  june  boatwright  give  a  damn  how  each 
other is coming? just give up. 

one night after the hail marys, august said, "lily, 
if you wish to touch our lady's heart, you're welcome, 
isn't she, june?" 

i glanced at june, who gave me a forced smile. 
"maybe some other time," i said. 
i'm here to tell you, if i was dying on my cot in 
the honey house and the only thing that could save me 
was june's change of heart, i would meet my death and 

 

174 

shoot  straight  to  heaven.  or  maybe  hell.  i  wasn't  even  
sure anymore. 

• • • 
the  best  meal  was  lunch,  which  zach  and  i  ate  
under the cool of the  pine trees.  may fixed us  bologna 
sandwiches nearly every single day. we could also count 
on  candlestick  salad,  which  meant  half  a  banana 
standing  up  in  a  pineapple  slice.  "let  me  light  your 
candle," she'd say, and strike an imaginary match. then 
she'd  fasten  a  bottled  cherry  on  the  tip  of  the  banana 
with  a  toothpick.
 in  
kindergarten.  but  we'd  go  along  with  her,  acting  all 
excited  over  her  lighting  the  banana.  for  dessert  we 
crunched cubes of lime kool-aid, which she'd frozen in 
ice trays. 

 like  zach  and  i

 were  still

one day we sat on the grass after lunch, listening 
to the wind snap the sheets rosaleen had hung on the 
clothesline. 

"what's  your  favorite  subject  in  school?"  zach 

asked. 

"english." 
"i bet you like to write themes," he said, rolling 

his eyes. 

"as a matter of fact i do. i was planning on being 

a writer and an english teacher in my spare time." 

"was planning?" he said. 

175 

 

"i don't think i have much of a future now, being 

an orphan." 

what i meant was being a fugitive from the law. 
considering the state of things, i didn't know if i'd even 
get back to high school. 

he  studied  his  fingers.  i  could  smell  the  sharp 
scent of his sweat. he had patches of honey on his shirt, 
which were attracting a horde of flies and causing him to 
swat incessantly. 

after a while he said, "me either." 
"you either what?" 
"i don't know if i'll have much of a future either." 
"why not? you're not an orphan." 
"no," he said. "i'm a negro." 
i felt embarrassed. "well, you could play football 

for a college team and then be a professional player." 

"why is  it sports is  the only  thing white people 
see us being successful at? i don't want to play football," 
he said. "i wanna be a lawyer." 

"that's fine with me," i said, a little annoyed. 
"i've  just  never  heard  of  a  negro  lawyer,  that's 
all.  you've  got  to  hear  of  these  things  before  you  can 
imagine them." 

"bullshit. you gotta imagine what's never been." 
i closed my eyes. "all right then, i'm imagining a 
negro lawyer. you are a negro perry mason. people are 

 

176 

coming  to  you  from  all  over  the  state,  wrong-accused 
people, and you get at the truth at the very last minute 
by tricking the real criminal on the witness stand." 

"yeah," he said, "i bust their ass with the truth." 
when he laughed, his tongue was grass green from kool-
aid. 

i started calling him zach the ass-busting lawyer. 
"oh, look who's here, zach the ass-busting lawyer," i'd 
say. 

it  was  along  about  this  point  rosaleen  started 
asking  me  what  did  i  think  i  was  doing—auditioning 
myself to get adopted by the calendar sisters? she said i 
was living in a dream world. "dream world" became her 
favorite two words. 

it was living in a dream world to pretend we had 
a  regular  life  when  there  was  a  manhunt  going  on,  to 
think we could stay here forever, to believe i would find 
out anything worth knowing about my mother. 

every time i shot back, what's wrong with living 

in a dream world? and she'd say, you have to wake up. 

• • • 
one  afternoon  when  i  was  alone  in  the  honey 
house, june wandered in looking for august. or so  she 
said. she crossed her arms over her chest. "so," she said, 
"you've been here—what? two weeks now?" 

how obvious can you get? 

177 

 

"look, if you want us to leave, me and rosaleen 
will be on our way," i said. "i'll write my aunt, and she'll 
send us bus money." 

she  raised  her  eyebrows.  "i  thought  you  didn't 
remember your aunt's last name, and now you know her 
name and her address." 

"actually, i knew it all  along," i  said. "i was  just 

hoping for a little time before we had to leave." 

it  seemed  like  her  face  softened  some  when  i 
said  that,  but  it  could've  been  wishful  thinking  on  my 
part. 

"heavens  to  betsy,  what's  this  talk  about  you 
leaving?" said august, standing in the doorway. neither 
one  of  us  had seen  her  come  in.  she  gave june a  hard 
look. 

"nobody wants you to leave, lily, till you're good 

and ready." 

standing beside august's  desk, i fidgeted with a 

stack of papers. 

june cleared her throat. "well, i need to get back 

and practice," she said, and breezed out the door. 

august  walked  over  and  sat  down  in  her  desk 
chair.  "lily,  you  can  talk  to  me.  you  know  that,  don't  
you?" 

when  i  didn't  answer,  she  caught  my hand  and 
drew me to her, pulling me right down onto her lap. it 

 

178 

was  not  mattress  deep  like  rosaleen's  but  thin  and 
angular. i wanted nothing more than to come clean with 
her. go pull my bag from underneath the cot and bring 
out my mother's  things. i wanted to produce the black 
mary picture and say, this belonged to my mother, this 
exact same, identical picture you put on your honey jars. 
and it has tiburon, south carolina, written on the back, 
so i know she must've been here. i wanted to hold up 
her photograph and say, have you ever seen her? take 
your time now. think carefully. 

but  i  hadn't  yet  pressed  my  hand  to  the  black 
mary's heart in the parlor, and i was too afraid to say all 
this without having  done at  least that.  i leaned against 
august's  chest,  pushing  aside  my  secret  wanting,  too 
afraid she'd say, no, i never saw this woman in my life. 
and that would be that. not knowing anything at all was 
better. 

i struggled to my feet. "i guess i'll go help in the 

kitchen." i crossed the yard without a glance back. 

that  night,  when  the  darkness  was  weighed 
down  with  singing  crickets  and  rosaleen  was  snoring 
right along with them, i had myself a good cry. i couldn't 
even say why. just everything, i guess. because i hated 
lying to august when she was so  good to me. because 
rosaleen  was  probably  right  about  dream  worlds. 
because i was pretty sure the virgin mary was not back 

 

179 

there  on  the  peach  farm  standing  in  for  me  the  way 
she'd stood in for beatrix. 

neil came over most evenings and sat with june 
in  the parlor while  the rest of  us watched  the  fugitive 
on  television  in  the  den.  august  said  she  wished  the 
fugitive  would  go  ahead  and  find  the  one-armed  man 
and get it over with. 

during commercials i pretended to go for water 
and instead crept down the hall, where i tried to make 
out what june and neil were saying. 

"i'd like you to tell me why not," i heard neil say 

one evening. 

and june, "because i can't." 
"that's not a reason." 
"well, it's the only one i've got." 
"look, i'm not gonna wait around forever," neil 

said. 

i  was  anticipating  what june  would  say  to  that, 
when neil came through the door without warning and 
caught  me  pressed  against  the  wall  listening  to  their 
most  private  sayings.  he  looked  for  a  second  like  he 
might  turn  me  over  to  june,  but  he  left,  banging  the 
front door behind him. 

i hightailed it back  to  the den,  but not  before i 

heard the beginnings of a sob in june's throat. 

• • • 

 

180 

one morning august sent zach and me six miles 
out in the county to bring in the last of the supers to be 
harvested.  lord,  it  was  hot,  plus  we  had  at  least  ten  
gnats per square inch of air. 

zach drove the honey wagon as fast as it would 
go,  which  was  about  thirty  miles  an  hour.  the  wind 
whipped  my  hair  and  flooded  the  truck  with  a  weedy, 
new-mown smell. 

the  roadsides  were  covered  with  fresh-picked 
cotton,  blown  from  the  trucks  carrying  it  to  the  gin  in 
tiburon.  zach  said  the  farmers  had  planted  and 
harvested their cotton early this year because of the boll 
weevil. scattered along the highway, it looked for all the 
world like snow, which made me wish for a blizzard to 
come  cool  things  down.  i  went  off  into  a  daydream 
about  zach  pulling  the  truck  over  because  he  couldn't 
see to drive for the snow and us having a snowball fight, 
blasting  each  other  with  soft  white  snow  cotton.  i 
imagined  us  building  a  snow  cave,  sleeping  with  our 
bodies twined together to get warm, our arms and legs 
like black-andwhite braids. this last thought shocked my 
system  so  bad  i  shivered.  i  stuck  my  hands  under  my 
arms, and my sweat was ice-water cold. 

"you all right?" asked zach. 
"yeah, why?" 
"you're shaking over there." 

181 

 

"i'm fine. i do that sometimes." 
i turned away and looked out the window, where 
there was nothing but fields and now and then a falling-
down  wooden  barn  or  some  old,  abandoned  colored 
house.  "how  much  further?"  i  said  in  a  way  that 
suggested the excursion could not be over too soon. 

"you upset or something?" 
i refused to answer him, glaring instead through 

the dirty windshield. 

when we turned off the highway onto a beat-up 
dirt  road,  zach  said  we  were  on  property  belonging  to 
mr.  clayton  forrest,  who  kept  black  madonna  honey 
and  beeswax  candles  in  the  waiting  room  of  his  law  
office  so  his  customers  could  buy  them.  part  of  zach's 
job was going around to deliver fresh supplies of honey 
and candles to places that sold them on consignment. 

"mr. forrest lets me poke around his law office," 

he said. 

"uh-huh." 
"he tells me about the cases he's won." 
we hit a rut and bounced on the seat so hard our 
heads  rammed  into  the  truck  roof,  which  for  some 
reason flipped my mood upside down. i started to laugh 
like  somebody  was  holding  me  down  tickling  my 
armpits. the more my head slammed against the truck, 

 

182 

the  worse  it  got,  till  i  was  having  one  big,  hilarious  
seizure. i laughed the way may cried. 

at first zach aimed for the ruts just to hear me, 
but then he got nervous because i couldn't seem to stop. 
he cleared his throat and slowed way down till we were 
bounce-free. 

finally  it  drained  out  of  me,  whatever  it  was.  i  
remembered the pleasure of fainting that day during the 
daughters of mary meeting and thought now how much 
i would like to keel over right here in the truck. i envied 
turtles their shells, how they could disappear at will. 

i  was  conscious  of  zach's  breathing,  his  shirt 
pulled across his chest, one arm draped on the steering 
wheel. the hard, dark look of it. the mystery of his skin. 
it was foolish to think some things were beyond 
happening, even being attracted to negroes. i'd honestly 
thought  such  a  thing  couldn't  happen,  the  way  water 
could not run uphill or salt could not taste sweet. a law 
of nature. 

maybe it was a simple matter of being attracted 
to what i couldn't have. or maybe desire kicked in when 
it pleased without noticing the  rules  we lived and  died 
by. you gotta imagine what's never been, zach had said. 
he stopped the honey wagon beside a cluster of 
twenty hives tucked in a thicket of trees, where the bees 

 

183 

could  have  shade  in  the  summer  and  shelter  from  the 
wind through the winter. 

bees were more fragile than i ever imagined. if it 
wasn't  mites ruining them, it  was  pesticides or  terrible 
weather. 

he climbed out and dragged a load of equipment 
off  the back of  the truck—helmets, extra  supers, fresh 
brood frames, and the smoker, which he handed me to 
light.  i  moved  through  camphorweed  and  wild  azalea, 
stepping over fire-ant mounds and swinging the smoker 
while  he  lifted  the  lids  off  the  hives  and  peered  inside 
looking for capped frames. 

he  moved  like  a  person  with  a  genuine  love  of 
bees. i could not believe how gentle and soft-hearted he 
could be. one of the frames he lifted out leaked honey 
the color of plums. 

"it's purple!" i said. 
"when  the  weather  turns  hot  and  the  flowers 
dry  up,  the  bees  start  sucking  elderberry.  it  makes  a 
purple honey. people will pay two dollars a jar for purple 
honey." 

he  dipped  his  finger  into  the  comb  and,  lifting 
my veil, brought it close to my lips. i opened my mouth, 
let his finger slide in, sucking it clean. the sheerest smile 
brushed his lips, and heat rushed up my body. he bent 
toward me. i wanted him to lift back my veil and kiss me, 

 

184 

and i knew he wanted to do it, too, by the way he fixed 
his eyes on mine. we stayed like that while bees swirled 
around  our  heads  with  a  sound  like  sizzling  bacon,  a 
sound  that  no  longer  registered  as  danger.  danger,  i 
realized, was a thing you got used to. 

but instead of kissing me, he turned to the next 
hive  and  went  right on with  his work.  the smoker  had 
gone  out.  i  followed  behind  him,  and  neither  of  us 
spoke.  we stacked the  filled supers  onto the  truck like 
the cat had our tongues, and neither of us said a word 
till  we  were  back  in  the  honey  truck  passing  the  city  
limits sign. 

tiburon, 

population 

6,502 

home of willifred marchant 

"who is willifred marchant?" i said, desperate to 

break the silence and get things back to normal. 

"you  mean  you've  never  heard  of  willifred 
marchant?" he said. "she is only a world-famous writer 
who  wrote  three  pulitzer  prize  books  about  the 
deciduous trees of south carolina." 

i giggled. "they didn't win any pulitzer prizes." 
"you  better  shut  your  mouth,  because 

in 
tiburon,  willifred  marchant's  books  are  way  up  there 
with  the  bible.  we  have  an  official  willifred  marchant 
day  every  year,  and  the  schools  hold  tree-planting 
ceremonies. she always comes wearing a big straw hat 

 

185 

and carrying a basket of rose petals, which she tosses to 
the children." 

"she does not," i said. 
"oh, yes. miss willie is very weird." 
"deciduous trees are an interesting topic, i guess. 

but i myself would rather write about people." 

"oh,  that's  right,  i  forgot,"  he  said.  "you're 

planning on being a writer. you and miss willie." 
"you act like you don't believe i can do it." 
"i didn't say that." 
"you implied it." 
"what are you talking about? i did not." 
i  turned  to  concentrate  on  things  beyond  the 
window.  the  masonic  lodge,  hot  buy  used  cars,  the 
firestone tire store. zach braked at a stop sign next to 
the dixie cafe, which sat practically in the front yard of 
the tri-county livestock company, and for some reason 
this made me furious. what i wanted to know was how 
people ate breakfast, lunch, and dinner with the smell of 
cows—and  worse—overwhelming  their  nose  buds.  i 
wanted  to  scream  out  the  window,  "eat  your  damned 
breakfast grits somewhere else, why don't you? there's 
cow shit in the air!" 

the way people lived their lives, settling for grits 
and  cow  shit,  made  me  sick.  my  eyes  stung  all  around  
the sockets. 

 

186 

zach  crossed  the  intersection.  i  could  feel  his 
eyes bore into the back of my head. "you mad at me?" 
he said. 

i meant to say, yes, i most certainly am, because 
you  think  i  will  never  amount  to  anything.  but  what 
came out of my mouth was something else, and it was 
embarrassingly stupid. "i will never throw rose petals to 
anybody,"  i  said,  and  then  i  broke  down,  the  kind  of 
crying  where  you're  sucking  air  and  making  heaving 
sounds like a person drowning. 

zach pulled over on the side of the road, saying, 
"holy  moly.  what's the matter?" he  wrapped one  arm 
around me and pulled me across the seat to him. 

i'd  thought  the  whole  thing  was  about  my  lost 
future, the one mrs. henry encouraged me to believe in 
by  plying  me with books  and  summer  reading  lists and 
big  talk  about  scholarships  to  columbia  college,  but 
sitting there close to zach, i knew i was crying because 
he had that oneoside dimple i loved, because every time 
i looked at him i got a hot, funny feeling that circulated 
from my waist to my kneecaps, because i'd been going 
along being my normal girl self and the next thing i knew 
i'd  passed  through  a  membrane 
into  a  place  of 
desperation. i was crying, i realized, for zach. 

i  laid  my  head  on  his  shoulder  and  wondered 
how  he  could  stand  me.  in  one  short  morning  i  had 

 

187 

exhibited  insane  laughter,  hidden  lust,  pissy  behavior, 
self-pity, and hysterical crying. if i'd been trying to show 
him my worst sides, i could not have done a better job 
than this. 

he  gave  me  a  squeeze  and  spoke  into  my  hair.  
"it's gonna be all right. you're gonna be a fine writer one 
day." i saw him glance behind us, then across the road. 
"now,  you  go  back  over  to  your  side  of  the  truck  and  
wipe your face," he said, and handed me a floor rag that 
smelled like gasoline. 

• • • 
when  we  got  to  the  honey  house, 

it  was 
deserted except for rosaleen, who was gathering up her 
clothes  so  she  could  move  up  to  may's  room.  i'd  been  
gone two slim hours, and our whole living arrangement 
had been overturned. 

"how come you get to sleep over there?" i asked 

her. 

"'cause may gets scared at night by herself." 
rosaleen  was  going  to  sleep  in  the  extra  twin  
bed,  get  the  bottom  drawer  of  may's  dresser  for  her 
stuff, and have the bathroom at her fingertips. 

"i  can't  believe  you're  leaving  me  over  here  by 

myself!" i cried. 

zach grabbed the hand truck and wheeled it out 
as  fast  as  he  could  to  start  unloading  the  supers  from  

 

188 

the  honey  wagon.  i  think  he'd  had  enough  female 
emotion for the time being. 

"i'm not leaving you. i'm getting a mattress," she 
said,  and  dropped  her  toothbrush  and  the  red  rose 
snuff into her pocket. i crossed my arms over my blouse 
that  was  still  damp  from  all  the  crying  i'd  been  doing. 
"fine then, go on. i don't care." 

"lily, that cot is bad on my back. and if you ain't 
noticed,  the  legs  on  it  are  all  bent  out  of  whack  now.  
another week and it's gonna collapse on the floor. you'll 
be fine without me." 

my  chest  closed  up.  fine  without  her.  was  she 

out of her mind? 

"i don't wanna wake up from the dream world," i 
said, and midsentence my voice cracked, and the words 
twisted and turned in my mouth. 

she  sat  on  the  cot,  the  cot  i  now  hated  with  a  
passion  because  it  had  driven  her  to  may's  room.  she 
pulled me down beside her. "i know you don't, but i'll be 
here when you do. i might sleep up there in may's room, 
but i'm not going anywhere." 

she  patted  my  knee  like  old  times.  she  patted, 
and neither of us said anything. we could've been back 
in the policeman's car riding to jail for how i felt. like i 
would not exist without her patting hand. 

 

189 

i followed rosaleen as she carried her few things 
over  to  the  pink  house,  intending  to  inspect  her  new 
room.  we  climbed  the  steps  onto  the  screen  porch. 
august sat on the porch swing that was suspended from 
two chains in the ceiling. she was rocking back and forth, 
having her orangeade break and reading her new book, 
which  she'd  gotten  from  the  bookmobile.  i  turned  my 
head to read the title. jane eyre. 

may was on the other side of the porch running 
clothes  through  the  rubber  rollers  on  the  wringer 
washing  machine.  a  brand-new  pink  lady  kenmore, 
which they kept out on the porch because there was no 
room  in  the  kitchen.  in  television  commercials  the 
woman who worked the lady kenmore wore an evening 
gown  and  seemed  to  be  enjoying  herself.  may  just 
looked  hot  and  tired.  she  smiled  as  rosaleen  went  by 
with her things. 

"are you okay with rosaleen moving over here?" 
august  said,  propping  the  book  on  her  stomach.  she 
took a sip of her drink, then ran her hand across the cold 
moisture on the glass and pressed her palm to the front 
of her neck. 

"i guess so." 
"may  will  sleep  better  with  rosaleen  in  there," 

she said. 

 

190 

"won't  you,  may?"  i  glanced  over  at  may,  but 

she didn't seem to hear over the washer. 

suddenly  the  last  thing  i  wanted  was  to  follow 
rosaleen  and  watch  her  tuck  her  clothes  into  may's 
dresser. i looked at august's book. 

"what are you reading about?" i asked, thinking i 

was making casual conversation, but boy, was i wrong. 

"it's  about  a  girl  whose  mother  died  when  she 

was little," she said. 

then  she  looked  at  me  in  a  way  that  made  my  
stomach  tip  over,  the  same  way  it'd  tipped  over  when  
she'd told me about beatrix. 

"what  happens  to  the  girl?"  i  asked,  trying  to  

make my voice steady. 

"i've only started the book," she said. "but right 

now she's just feeling lost and sad." 

i  turned  and  looked  out  toward  the  garden, 
where june and neil were picking tomatoes. i stared at 
them while  the  crank on the  washer  squeaked.  i could 
hear the clothes falling into the basin behind the rollers. 
she knows, were thought. she knows who i am. 

i stretched out my arms like i was pushing back 
invisible walls of air and, looking down, caught sight of 
my  shadow  on  the  floor,  this  skinny  girl  with  wild  hair 
curling up in the humidity, with her arms flung out and 
her palms erect like she was trying to stop traffic in both 

 

191 

directions. i wanted to bend down and kiss her, for how 
small and determined she looked. 

when  i  glanced  back  at  august,  she  was  still  

staring at me, like she expected me to say something. 

"well,  i guess  i'll  go  see  rosaleen's  new  bed," i 

said. 

august  picked  up  her  book,  and  that  was  that. 
the  moment  passed,  and  so  did  the  feeling  that  she 
knew who i was. i mean, it didn't make sense: how could 
august boatwright know anything about me? 

it was around this time that june and neil started 
a  first-class  fight  out  there  in  the  tomato  garden.  june 
shouted something, and he shouted back. 

"uh-oh,"  said  august.  she  put  down  the  book 

and stood up. 

"why can't you just let it be?" yelled june. 
"why does it always come back to this? get this 
i'm  not  getting  married.  not 

through  your  head: 
yesterday, not today, not next year!" 

"what are you scared of?" neil said. 
"for  your 

information, 

i'm  not  scared  of 

anything." 

"well, then, you're  the most  selfish  bitch i  ever 

met," he said, and started walking toward his car. 
"oh, lord," said august under her breath. 

 

192 

"how  dare  you  call  me  that!"  said  june.  "you 
come back here. don't you walk off when i'm talking to 
you!" 

neil  kept  right  on  walking,  didn't  look  over  his 
shoulder  once.  zach,  i  noticed,  had  stopped  loading 
supers  onto  the  hand  truck  and  watched,  shaking  his 
head like he couldn't believe he was witnessing another 
scene where people's worst sides come out. 

"if  you  leave  now,  don't  plan  on  coming  back!" 

she yelled. 

neil  climbed  into  his  car,  and  suddenly  june 
came  running  with  tomatoes  in  her  hands.  she  reared 
back and threw one, splat! right into the windshield. the 
second one landed on the door handle. 

"don't you come back!" she yelled as neil drove 

off. trailing tomato juice. 

may  sank  down  onto  the  floor,  crying  and 
looking so hurt inside i could almost see soft, red places 
up under her rib bones. august and i walked her out to 
her  wall,  and  for  the  umpteenth  time  she  wrote  june 
and neil on a scrap of paper and wedged it between the 
rocks. 

we  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  working  on  the 
supers  that  zach  and i  had  hauled  in.  stacked  six  high, 
they  made  a  miniature  skyline  all  through  the  honey 
house. august said it looked like bee city in there. 

 

193 

we ran twelve extractor loads through the whole 
system—all  the  way  from  the  uncapping  knife  to  the 
bottling tank. august didn't like her honey to sit around 
waiting  too  long,  because  the  flavor  got  lost.  we  had  
two  days  to  finish  it  up,  she  said.  period.  at  least  we 
didn't have to store the honey in a special hot room to 
keep  it  from  crystallizing,  because  every  room  we  had 
was a hot room. sometimes carolina heat turned out to 
be  good  for  something.  just  when  i  thought  we  were 
done  for  the  day  and  could  go  eat  dinner  and  say  our 
evening  prayers  with  the  beads,  no,  we  were  just 
beginning. august had us load up the empty supers and 
haul them out to the woods so the bees could come and 
do the big cleanup. she would not store her supers for 
the  winter  until  the  bees  had  sucked  out  the  last 
remaining bits  of  honey from the  combs.  she  said  that 
was  because  honey  remnants  attracted  roaches.  but 
really, i'm sure it was because she loved throwing a little 
end-of-the-year party for her bees, seeing them descend 
on the supers like they'd discovered honey heaven. 

the  whole  time  we  worked,  i  marveled  at  how 
mixed up people got when it came to love. i myself, for 
instance. it seemed like i was now thinking of zach forty 
minutes  out  of  every  hour,  zach,  who  was  an 
impossibility.  that's  what  i  told  myself  five  hundred 

 

194 

times: impossibility. i can tell you this much: the word is 
a great big log thrown on the fires of love. 

• • • 
that  night  it  felt  strange  to  be  in  the  honey 
house  by  myself.  i  missed  rosaleen's  snoring  the  way 
you'd miss the sound of ocean waves after you've gotten 
used  to  sleeping with them.  i didn't  realize  how  it  had 
comforted  me.  quietness  has  a  strange,  spongy  hum 
that can nearly break your eardrums. 

i didn't know if it was the emptiness, the stifling 
heat, or the fact it was only nine o'clock, but i couldn't 
settle into sleep despite how tired i was. i peeled off my 
top  and  my  underwear  and  lay  on  the  damp  sheets.  i 
liked the feel of nudeness. it was a smooth, oiled feeling 
on the sheets, a set-free feeling. i imagined then that  i 
heard  a  car  pull  into  the  driveway.  i  imagined  it  was  
zach,  and  the  thought  of  him  moving  in  the  night  just 
outside the honey house caused my breath to speed up. 
i  rose  and  slipped  across  the  dark  space  to  the  wall 
mirror.  pearled  light poured  through  the  open  window 
behind me,  molding  to my  skin, giving me  a true  halo, 
not just around my head but across my shoulders, along 
my  ribs  and  thighs.  i  was  the  last  person  to  deserve  a  
halo, but  i studied  the  effect, cupping  my  hands  under 
my  breasts,  studying  my  pinky-brown  nipples,  the  thin 

 

195 

curves of my waist, every soft and glowing turn. it was 
the first time i'd felt like more than a scraggly girl. 

i closed my eyes, and the balloon full of craving 
finally burst open in my chest, and when it did, wouldn't 
you know—one minute i was dreaming of zach and the 
next  i  was  hungering  for  my  mother,  imagining  her 
calling my name, saying, lily, girl. you are my flower. 

when i turned to the window, there was no one 

there. not that i had expected there would be. 

two days later, after we had run ourselves into 
the  ground  harvesting  the  rest  of  the  honey,  zach 
showed  up  with  the  prettiest  notebook—green  with 
rosebuds  on  the  cover.  he  met  me  coming  out  of  the  
pink house. "this is for you," he said. "so you can get a 
head start on your writing." 

that's  when  i knew  i would  never  find  a  better 
friend than zachary taylor. i threw my arms around him 
and leaned into his chest. he made a sound like whoa, 
but after a second his arms folded around me, and we 
stayed like that, in a true embrace. he moved his hands 
up and down my back, till i was almost dizzy. 

finally he unwound my arms and said, "lily, i like 
you better than any girl i've ever known, but you have to 
understand,  there  are  people  who  would  kill  boys  like 
me for even looking at girls like you." 

 

196 

i couldn't restrain myself from touching his face, 
the  place  where  his  dimple  caved  into  his  skin.  "i'm 
sorry," i said. 

"yeah. me, too," he said. 
for  days  i  carried  the  notebook  everywhere.  i 
wrote  constantly.  a  made-up  story  about  rosaleen 
losing eighty-five pounds, looking so sleek nobody could 
pick her out of a police lineup. one about august driving 
a honeymobile around, similar to the bookmobile, only 
she had jars of honey to dispense instead of books. my 
favorite, though, was one about zach becoming the ass-
busting lawyer and getting his own television show like 
perry mason. i read it to him during lunch one day, and 
he listened better than a child at story hour. 

"move over, willifred marchant" was all he said. 

 

 

 

197 

chapter eight 

honeybees  depend  not  only  on  physical 
contact with the colony, but also require its social 
companionship  and  support.  isolate  a  honeybee 
from her sisters and she will soon die. 

—the queen must die: and other affairs 
of bees and men 
 
august tore the july page from the wall calendar 
that hung by her desk in the honey house. i wanted to 
tell  her  that  technically  it  was  still  july  for  five  more 
days, but i figured she knew already. it was a simple case 
of  her  wanting  july  over  with  so  she  could  start  into 
august,  her  special  month.  just  like  june  was  june's 
month and may belonged to may. 

august  had  explained  to  me  how  when  they 
were  children  and  their  special  month  came  around, 
their mother  excused them  from  house chores  and let 
them eat all their favorite foods even if it wrecked their 
teeth  and  stay  up  a  full  hour  later  at  night  doing 

 

198 

whatever their heart desired. august said her heart had 
desired  to  read  books,  so  the  whole  month  she  got  to 
prop on the sofa in the quiet of the living room reading 
after her sisters went to bed. to listen to august talk, it 
had been the highlight of her youth. 

after  hearing  this,  i'd  spent  a  good  amount  of 
time trying to think up which month i would have liked 
to  have  been  named  for.  i  picked  october,  as  it  is  a  
golden  month  with  better-than-average  weather,  and 
my  initials  would  be  o.o.  for  october  owens,  which 
would make an interesting monogram. i pictured myself 
eating 
for  breakfast 
throughout the  entire  month,  staying  up  an  hour  after 
bedtime writing high-caliber stories and poems. 

three-tiered  chocolate  cake 

i looked over at august, who stood by her desk 
with  the  july  calendar  page  in  her  hand.  she  wore her 
white dress  with the  lime green scarf tied  on her  belt, 
just like she was wearing the first day i showed up. the 
scarf had no purpose hanging there other than adding a 
touch of flair. she hummed their song: place a beehive 
on  my  grave  and  let  the  honey  soak  through.  i  was 
thinking what a good, fine mother she must've had. 

"come  on,  lily,"  she  said.  "we've  got  all  these  
jars  of  honey  to  paste  labels  on,  and  it's  just  me  and  
you." 

 

199 

zach  was  spending  the  day  delivering  honey  to 
her  selling  places  all  over  town  and  picking  up  money 
from  the  previous  month's  sales.  "honey  money"  was 
what zach called it. even though the big honey flow was 
over, the bees were still out there sucking nectar, going 
about  their  business.  (you  could  not  stop  a  bee  from 
working if you tried.) 

zach  said  august's  honey  brought  fifty  cents  a 
pound. i figured she must be dripping in honey money. i 
didn't see why she wasn't living in a  hot pink  mansion 
somewhere. waiting on august to open a box containing 
the new shipment of black madonna labels, i studied a 
piece  of  honeycomb.  people  don't  realize  how  smart 
bees  are,  even  smarter  than  dolphins.  bees  know 
enough  geometry  to  make  row  after  row  of  perfect 
hexagons,  angles  so  accurate  you'd  think  they  used 
rulers.  they  take  plain  flower  juice  and  turn  it  into 
something  everyone  in  the  world  loves  to  pour  on 
biscuits. and i have personally witnessed how it took a 
whole fifteen minutes for  about fifty thousand bees to 
find those empty supers august had left out for them to 
clean  up,  passing  along  the  discovery  in  some  kind  of 
advanced bee language. 

but the main thing is they are hardworking to the 
point of killing themselves. sometimes you want to say 
to them, relax, take some time off, you deserve it. 

 

200 

as august reached down  inside  the box  for  the 
labels, 
i  studied  the  return  address:  holy  virgin 
monastery  gift  shop,  post  office  box  45,  st.  paul, 
minnesota. next she pulled a fat envelope from her desk 
drawer  and  poured  out  dozens  of  a  different,  smaller 
label  with  printed  letters:  black  madonna  honey—
tiburon, south carolina. 

i was supposed to swipe the backs of both labels 
with  a  wet  sponge  and  hand  them  off  to  august  to 
position on the jars, but i paused a minute to take in the 
black  madonna's  picture,  which  i'd  studied  so  many 
times  glued  onto  my  mother's  little  block  of  wood.  i  
admired the fancy gold scarf draped over her head, how 
it  was  decorated  with  red  stars.  her  eyes  were 
mysterious  and  kind  and  her  skin  dark  brown  with  a 
glow,  darker  than  toast  and  looking  a  little  like  it  had  
been buttered. it always caused a tiny jump start in my 
chest,  me  thinking  that  my  own  mother  had  stared  at 
this same picture. 

i hated to imagine where i might have ended up 
if i hadn't seen the black madonna's picture that day in 
the  frogmore  stew  general  store  and  restaurant. 
probably  sleeping  on  creek  banks  all  over  south 
carolina.  drinking  pond  water  with  the  cows.  peeing 
behind  chinaberry  bushes  and  wishing  for  the  joy  of 
toilet paper. 

 

201 

"i  hope  you  don't  take  this  the  wrong  way,"  i  
said.  "but  i  never  thought  of  the  virgin  mary  being 
colored till i saw this picture." 

"a  dark-faced  mary  is  not  as  unusual  as  you 
think," august said. "there are hundreds of them over in 
europe, places like france and spain. the one we put on 
our honey is old as the hills. she's the black madonna of 
breznichar in bohemia." 

"how did you learn about all that?" i asked. 
she  rested  her  hands  and  smiled,  like  this  had 
dredged up a sweet, long-lost memory. "i guess i would 
have to say it started with my mother's prayer cards. she 
used  to  collect  them,  the  way  good  catholics  did  back 
then—you know, those cards with pictures of saints on 
them.  she'd  trade  for  them  like  little  boys  traded 
baseball cards." august let out a big laugh at that. "i bet 
she had a dozen black madonna cards. i used to love to 
play  with  her  cards,  especially  the  black  madonnas. 
then,  when  i  went  off  to  school,  i  read  everything  i  
could  about  them.  that's  how  i  found  out  about  the 
black madonna of breznichar in bohemia." 

i tried  to  say  breznichar, but  it  didn't  come  out 
right. "well, i can't say her name, but i love her picture." 
i  swiped  the  back  of  the  label  and  watched 
august  fix  it  on  the  jar,  then  fasten  the  second  label 
beneath it, as if she'd done this ten thousand times. 

 

202 

"what else do you love, lily?" 
no one had ever asked me this before. what did 
i  love?  right  off  the  bat  i  wanted  to  say  i  loved  the  
picture of my mother, how she was leaning against the 
car with her hair looking just like mine, plus her gloves 
and  her  picture  of 
the 
unpronounceable name, but i had to swallow that back. 
i said, "well, i  love rosaleen, and i  love writing 
stories and poems—just give me something to write and 
i will love it." after that, i really had to think. 

the  black  mary  with 

i said, "this may  be silly, but after school i  love 
coca-cola with salted peanuts poured in the bottle. and 
when i'm finished with it, i love turning up the bottle to 
see where it came from." 

once  i'd  gotten  a  bottle  from  massachusetts, 
which i kept as a tribute to how far something can go in 
life. 

"and  i love  the color  blue—the real  bright blue 
like  the  hat  may  had  on  at  the  daughters  of  mary 
meeting.  and  since  coming  here,  i've  learned  to  love 
bees and honey." i wanted to add, and you, i love you, 
but i felt too awkward. 

"did  you  know  there  are  thirty-two  names  for  
love in one of the eskimo languages?" august said. "and 
we just have this one. we are so limited, you have to use 
the same word for loving rosaleen as you do for loving a 

 

203 

coke  with  peanuts.  isn't  that  a  shame  we  don't  have 
more ways to say it?" 

i nodded, wondering where was the limit of her 
knowing things. probably one of those books she'd read 
after  bedtime  during  the  month  of  august  had  been 
about eskimos. 

"i  guess  we'll  just  have  to  invent  more  ways  to  
say it," she said. then she smiled. "do you know i love 
peanuts in my coke, too? and blue is my favorite color?" 
you  know  that  saying,  "birds  of  a  feather  flock 

together"? that's how i felt. 

we  were  working  on  the  jars  of  tupelo  tree  
honey,  which  zach  and  i  had  gathered  out  there  on 
clayton  forrest's  land,  plus  a  few  jars  of  purple  honey 
from  the  hive  where  the  bees  had  struck  it  rich  on  
elderberries.  it  was  a  nice  color  coordination  the  way 
the bohemian madonna's skin was set off by the golds in 
the honey. unfortunately, the purple honey didn't do a 
whole lot for her. 

"how come you put the black madonna on your 
honey?"  i  asked.  i'd  been  curious  about  this  from  day 
one. usually people got in a rut putting honey bears on 
them. 

august  grew  still,  holding  a  jar  in  her  hand  and 
looking into the distance like she'd gone in search of the 
answer  and  that  finding  it  had  been  the  bonus  of  the 

 

204 

day.  "i  wish  you  could've  seen  the  daughters  of  mary 
the first time they laid eyes on this label. you know why? 
because  when  they  looked  at  her,  it  occurred  to  them 
for  the  first  time  in  their  lives  that  what's  divine  can  
come in dark skin. you see, everybody needs a god who 
looks like them, lily." i only wished i'd been there when 
the  daughters  of  mary  had  made  this  big  discovery.  i 
pictured  them  whooping  it  up  in  their  glorious  hats. 
feathers flying. sometimes i would catch myself jiggling 
my  foot  till  i  thought  it  might  fall  off  my  leg  bone—
"jimmy-leg," rosaleen called it—and looking down now, 
i noticed it was going at high speed. usually it happened 
in  the  evenings  when  we  did  our  prayers  before  our 
lady of chains. like my feet wanted to get up and march 
around the room in a conga line. 

"so how did you get the black mary statue in the 

parlor?" i asked. 

"i  can't  say,  exactly.  i  only  know  she  came  into  
the family at some point. you remember the story about 
obadiah taking the statue to the praise house, and how 
the  slaves  believed  it  was  mary  who  had  come  to  be  
among them?" 

i nodded. i remembered every detail. i'd seen it a 
hundred  times  in  my  mind  since  she'd  first  told  it. 
obadiah  down  on  his knees  in  the  mud, bent  over  the 
washed-up  statue.  the  statue  standing  proud  in  the 

 

205 

praise house, our lady's fist in the air and all the people 
coming up one at a time to touch her heart, hoping to 
find a little strength to go on. 

"well,"  august  said,  going  right  on  with  her 
pasting, "you know,  she's  really  just the  figurehead off 
an old ship, but the people needed comfort and rescue, 
so  when  they  looked  at  it,  they  saw  mary,  and  so  the  
spirit  of  mary  took 
is 
everywhere, lily, just everywhere. inside rocks and trees 
and even people, but sometimes it will get concentrated 
in  certain  places  and  just  beam  out  at  you  in  a  special  
way." 

it  over.  really,  her  spirit 

i had never thought of it like that, and it gave me 
a shocked feeling, like maybe i had no idea what kind of 
world i was actually living in, and maybe the teachers at 
my school didn't know either, the way they talked about 
everything  being  nothing  but  carbon  and  oxygen  and 
mineral, the dullest stuff you can imagine. 

i  started  thinking  about  the  world  loaded  with 
disguised  marys  sitting  around  all  over  the  place  and 
hidden  red  hearts  tucked  about  that  people  could  rub 
and touch, only we didn't recognize them. 

august arranged the jars she'd labeled so far in a 
cardboard box and set it on the floor, then dragged out 
more  jars.  "i'm  just  trying  to  explain  to  you  why  the  
people took such care with our lady of chains, passing 

 

206 

her one generation to the next. the best we can figure, 
sometime  after  the  civil
 war  she  came  into  the  
possession of my grandmother's people." 

"when i was younger than you, me and june and 
may—and april, too, because she was still alive then—
all  of  us  would  visit  our  grandmother  for  the  whole 
summer.  we'd  sit  on  the  rug  in  the  parlor,  and  big  
mama—that's  what  we  called  her—would  tell  us  the 
story.  every  time,  when  she  finished,  may  would  say, 
'big mama, tell it again," and off she'd go, repeating the 
whole  thing.  i  swear,  if  you  listen  to  my  chest  with  a  
stethoscope, what you'd hear is that story going on and 
on in my big mama's voice." 

i was so  caught up in what august was saying i 
had stopped wetting labels. i was wishing i had a story 
like  that  one  to  live  inside  me  with  so  much  loudness 
you could pick it up on a stethoscope, and not the story i 
did  have  about  ending  my  mother's  life  and  sort  of 
ending my own at the same time. 

"you can wet the labels and listen," august said, 

and smiled. 

"so, after big mama died, our lady of chains was 
passed to my mother. she stayed in mother's bedroom. 
my father hated her being in there. he wanted to get rid 
of the statue, but mother said, 'if she goes, i go.' i think 
the statue was the reason mother became a catholic, so 

 

207 

she  could  kneel  down  before  her  and  not  feel  like  she 
was doing anything peculiar. we would find her in there 
talking to our lady like they were two neighbors having 
sweet iced tea. mother would tease our lady; she'd say, 
'you know what? you should've had a girl instead.'" 

august set down the jar she was working on, and 
there was a mix of sorrow and amusement and longing 
across her face, and i thought, she is missing her mother. 
i stopped wetting the labels, not wanting to get 

ahead of her. 

when she picked up the jar again, i said, "did you 
grow  up  in  this  house?"  i  wanted  to  know  everything 
there was about her. 

she  shook  her  head.  "no,  but  my  mother  did. 
this is where i spent my summers," she said. "you see, 
the  house  belonged  to  my  grandparents,  and  all  this 
property around it. big  mama kept bees, too, right out 
there in the same spot they're in today. nobody around 
here had ever seen a lady beekeeper till her. she liked to 
tell  everybody that  women  made the best  beekeepers, 
'cause they have a special ability built into them to love 
creatures  that  sting.  'it  comes  from  years  of  loving 
children and husbands,' she'd say." august laughed, and 
so did i. 

"was your big mama the one who taught you to 
keep  bees?"  august  took  off  her  glasses  and  cleaned 

 

208 

them on the scarf at her waist. "she taught me lots more 
about bees than just how to keep them. she used to tell 
me one tall bee tale after another." 

i perked up. "tell me one," i said. 
august thumped her finger on her forehead like 
she was trying to tap one of them off some back shelf in 
her head. then her eyes lit up, and she said, "well, one 
time  big  mama  told  me  she  went  out  to  the  hives  on  
christmas eve and heard the bees singing the words of 
the  christmas  story  right  out  of  the  gospel  of  luke." 
august  started  to  sing  then  in  a  humming  sort  of  way,  
"'mary  brought  forth  her  firstborn  child  and  wrapped 
him in swaddling clothes and laid him in the manger.'" 
i giggled. "do you think that really happened?" 
"well,  yes  and  no,"  she  said.  "some  things 
happen in a literal way, lily. and then other things, like 
this  one,  happen  in  a  not  literal  way,  but  they  still 
happen. do you know what i mean?" 

i didn't have a clue. "not really," i said. 
"what  i  mean  is  that  the  bees  weren't  really  
singing  the  words  from  luke,  but  still,  if  you  have  the 
right kind of ears, you can listen to a hive and hear the 
christmas  story  somewhere  inside  yourself.  you  can 
hear  silent  things  on  the  other  side  of  the  everyday 
world that nobody else can. big mama had those kind of 

 

209 

ears. now, my mother, she didn't really have that gift. i 
think it skipped a generation." 

i was itching to know more about her mother. "i 

bet your mother kept bees, too," i said. 

she seemed amused at that. "goodness no, she 
wasn't  interested  at  all.  she  left  here  as  soon  as  she 
could  and  went  to  live  with  a  cousin  up  in  richmond. 
got a job in a hotel laundry. you remember the first day 
you  got  here,  i  told  you  i  grew  up  in  richmond?  well,  
that's  where  my  father  was  from.  he  was  the  first 
colored  dentist  in  richmond.  he  met my  mother  when 
she went to see him with a toothache." 

i sat there a minute and thought about the odd 
ways of life. if it wasn't for a toothache, august wouldn't 
be here. or may or june, or black madonna honey, and i 
wouldn't be sitting here talking to her. 

"i loved richmond, but my heart was always right 
here," she said. "growing up, i couldn't wait to get here 
and spend the summers, and when big mama died, she 
left  all  this  property  to  me,  june,  and  may.  i've  been  
here keeping bees nearly eighteen years now. 

sunlight  gleamed  against 

the  honey-house 
window,  flickering  now  and  then  with  a  shifting  cloud. 
we  sat  in  the  yellowish  quiet  for  a  while  and  worked  
without talking. i was afraid i'd tire her out with all my 

 

210 

questions. finally i couldn't hold myself back. i said, "so 
what did you do in virginia before you came here?" 

she gave me a teasing look that seemed to say, 
my goodness, you sure do wanna know a lot of things, 
but then she dived right in, her hands not slowing down 
one bit pasting labels. 

"i

 studied  at  a  negro  teachers'

 college  in  
maryland.  june  did,  too,  but  it  was  hard  to  get  a  job, 
since  there  weren't  that  many  places  for  negroes  to  
teach. i ended up working nine years as a housekeeper. 
eventually i got a job teaching history. it lasted six years, 
till we moved down here." 
"what about june?" 
she  laughed.  "june—you  wouldn't  catch  her 
keeping house for white people. she went to work at a 
colored  funeral  home,  dressing  the  bodies  and  doing 
their hair." 

that seemed like the perfect job for her. it would 

be easy for her to get along with dead people. 

"may said june almost got married one time." 
"that's right. about ten years ago." 
"i was wondering—" i stopped, looking for a way 

to ask her. 

"you  were  wondering  if  there  was  ever  a  time 

when i almost got married." 

"yeah," i said. "i guess i was." 

 

211 

"i  decided  against  marrying  altogether.  there 
were  enough  restrictions  in  my  life  without  someone 
expecting me to wait on him hand and foot. not that i'm 
against marrying, lily. i'm just against how it's set up." 

i was thinking, well, it's not just marriage that's 
set up like that. what about me waiting on t. ray hand 
and foot, and we  were  just father and  daughter? pour 
me some more tea, lily. polish my shoes, lily. go get the 
truck  keys,  lily.  i  sincerely  hoped  she  didn't  mean  this 
sort of thing went on in a marriage. 

"weren't you ever in love?" i asked. 
"being  in  love  and  getting  married,  now,  that's 
two different things. i was in love once, of course i was. 
nobody should go through life without falling in love." 
"but you didn't love him enough to marry him?" 
she smiled at me. "i loved him enough," she said. 

"i just loved my freedom more." 

we glued labels till we ran out of jars. then, for 
the  heck  of  it,  i  moistened  the  back  of  one  more  and  
pressed  it  onto  my  t-shirt,  in  the  gully  between  my  
breasts. 

august  looked  at  the  clock,  announcing  we'd 
done so  good with our  time we  had a whole hour  left 
before lunch. 

"come on," she said. "let's do bee patrol." 

 

212 

though  i'd  done  bee  patrol  with  zach,  i  hadn't 
been back to the hives with august since that first time. i 
pulled on long cotton pants  that used to be june's and 
august's white shirt, which needed the sleeves rolled up 
about ten turns. then i placed the jungle helmet on my 
head, letting the veil fall down over my face. we walked 
to the woods beside the pink house with her stories still 
pulled  soft  around  our  shoulders.  i  could  feel  them 
touching me in places, like an actual shawl. 

"there is one thing i don't get," i said. 
"what's that?" 
"how  come  if  your  favorite  color  is  blue,  you 

painted your house so pink?" 

she  laughed.  "that  was  may's  doing.  she  was 
with me the day i went to the paint store to pick out the 
color. i had a nice tan color in mind, but may latched on 
to  this  sample  called  caribbean  pink.  she  said  it  made 
her  feel  like  dancing  a  spanish  flamenco.  i  thought, 
"well, this is the tackiest color i've ever seen, and we'll 
have  half  the  town  talking  about  us,  but  if  it  can  lift 
may's heart like that, i guess she ought to live inside it." 
"all this time i just figured you liked pink," i said. 
she laughed again. "you know, some things don't 
matter  that  much,  lily.  like  the  color  of  a  house.  how  
big  is  that  in  the  overall  scheme  of  life?  but  lifting  a  

 

213 

person's heart—now, that matters.  the whole problem 
with people is—" 

"they  don't  know  what  matters  and  what 
doesn't," i said, filling in her sentence and feeling proud 
of myself for doing so. 

"i was gonna say, the problem is they know what 
matters, but  they  don't  choose it.  you  know  how  hard 
that is, lily? i love may, but it was still so hard to choose 
caribbean pink.  the  hardest thing on  earth is  choosing 
what matters." 

i couldn't locate a stray bee anywhere. the hives 
looked like an abandoned neighborhood, the air groggy 
with heat. you got the impression the bees were inside 
having  a  big  siesta.  maybe  all  that  excessive  work  had 
finally caught up with them. 

"where are they?" i said. 
august placed her finger to her lips, signaling me 

to be quiet. 

she lifted off her helmet and laid the side of her 
face flat against the top of the hive box. "come listen," 
she whispered. 

i removed my hat, tucking it under my arm, and 
placed my face next to hers so that we were practically 
nose to nose. 

"you hear that?" she said. 

 

214 

a sound rushed up. a perfect hum, high-pitched 
and swollen, like someone had put the teakettle on and 
it had come to a boil. 

"they're  cooling  the  hives  down,"  she  said,  and 
her  breath  broke  over  my  face  with  the  smell  of  
spearmint. 

"that's the sound of one hundred thousand bee 
wings fanning the air." she closed her eyes and soaked it 
in  the  way  you  imagine  people  at  a  fancy  orchestra 
concert drinking up highbrow music. i hope it's not too 
backward  to  say  that  i  felt  like  i  had  never  heard  
anything  on  my  hi-fi  back  home  that  came  out  that 
good. you would have to hear it yourself to believe the 
perfect pitch, the harmony parts, how the volume rolled 
up and down. we had our ears pressed to a giant music 
box. 

then the whole side of my face started to vibrate 
as  if  the  music  had  rushed  into  my  pores.  i  could  see  
august's  skin  pulsating  the  tiniest  bit.  when  we  stood 
back up, my cheek prickled and itched. 

"you  were  listening  to  bee  air-conditioning," 

august said. 

"most  people  don't have  any idea  about  all  the 
complicated  life  going  on  inside  a  hive.  bees  have  a  
secret life we don't know anything about." 

 

215 

i loved the idea of bees having a secret life, just 

like the one i was living. 

"what other secrets have they got?" i wanted to 

know. 

play." 

"well,  for  instance,  every  bee  has  its  role  to 

she  went  through  the  whole  thing.  the  nest 
builders were the group that drew the comb. i told her 
the way they created hexagons, they must be the ones 
who  could do math  in their  heads,  and  she smiled and 
said,  yes,  nest  builders  had  true  math  aptitude.  field 
bees  were  the  ones  with  good  navigation  skills  and 
tireless  hearts,  going  out  to  gather  nectar  and  pollen. 
there  was  a  group  called  mortician  bees  whose  pitiful 
job it was to rake the dead bees out of the hive and keep 
everything on the clean side. 

nurse bees, august said, had a gift for nurturing, 
and they fed all the baby bees. they were probably the 
self-sacrificing  group,  like  the  women  at  church  socials 
who said, "no, you take the chicken breast. i'm just fine 
with the neck and gizzard, really." the only males were 
the  drones  who  sat  around  waiting  to  mate  with  the 
queen. 

"and of course," august said, "there's the queen 

and her attendants." 

"she has attendants?" 
216 

 

"oh,  yes,  like  ladies-in-waiting.  they  feed  her, 
bathe her, keep her warm or cool—whatever's needed. 
you  can  see  them  always  circled  around  her,  fussing 
over her. i've even seen them caress her." 

august returned her helmet to her head. "i guess 
i'd want comfort, too, if i did nothing but lay eggs all day 
long, week in and week out." 

"that's  all  she  does—lay  eggs?"  i  wasn't  sure 
what i expected, it wasn't like she wore a crown and sat 
on a throne giving out royal orders. 

"egg  laying  is  the  main  thing,  lily.  she's  the 
mother of every bee in the hive, and they all depend on 
her to keep it going. i don't care what their job is—they 
know  the  queen  is  their  mother.  she's  the  mother  of 
thousands." 

the mother of thousands. 
bees  poured  out,  rushing  up  all  of  a  sudden  in 

spirals of chaos and noise, that caused me to jump. 

"don't  move  an  inch,"  said  august.  "remember 

what i told you. don't be scared." 

a bee flew straight at my forehead, collided with 

the net, and bumped against my skin. 

"she's  giving  you  a  little  warning,"  august  said. 
"when they bump your forehead, they're saying, i've got 
my eye on you, so you be careful. send them love and 
everything will be fine." 

 

217 

i love you, i love you, i said in my head. 
i love you. i tried to mean it. 
august  pulled  out  the  brood  frames  not  even 
wearing  her  gloves.  while  she  worked,  the  bees  spun 
around  us,  gathering  strength  till  they  made  soft  wind 
on our faces. it reminded me of the way the bees had 
flown  out  of  my  bedroom  walls,  stranding  me  at  the 
center of a bee whirlwind. 

i watched the different shadows on the ground. 
the funnel of bees. me, still as a fence post. august bent 
over  the  hive,  inspecting  the  frames,  looking  for  wax 
buildup on the comb, the half moon shape of her helmet 
bouncing along. 

the  bees  began  to  light  on  my  shoulders  the 
ways  birds  sit  on  telephone  wires.  they  sat  along  my 
arms,  speckled  the  bee  veil  so  i  could  scarcely  see 
through it. i love you. i love you. they covered my body, 
filled the cuffs of my pants. 

 i

my  breath  came  faster,  and  something  coiled 
around my chest and squeezed tighter and tighter, until 
suddenly,  like  somebody  had  snapped  off  the  panic 
switch,
 my  mind  became  
unnaturally calm, as if part of me had lifted right up out 
of my body and was sitting on a tree limb watching the 
spectacle  from  a  safe  distance.  the  other  part  of  me  
danced with the bees. i wasn't moving a lick, but in my 

 felt  myself  go  limp.

 

218 

mind  i  was  spinning  through  the  air  with  them.  i  had 
joined the bee conga line. 

i sort of forgot where i was. with my eyes closed, 
i slowly raised my arms, weaving them through the bees, 
until  finally  i  stood  with  them  stretched  out  from  my 
sides in a dreamy place i'd never been before. my neck 
rolled  back  and  my  mouth  opened.  i  was  floating 
somewhere,  somewhere  that  didn't  rub  too  close 
against life.  like  i'd chewed the bark  from  a  toothache 
tree and it had made me dizzy. 

lost  in  the  bees,  i  felt  dropped  into  a  field  of 
enchanted clover that made me immune to everything, 
as  if  august  has  doused  me  with  the  bee  smoker  and 
quieted  me  down  to  the  point  i  could  do  nothing  but 
raise my arms and sway back and forth. 

then,  without  warning,  all  the  immunity  wore 
off,  and  i  felt  the  hollow,  spooned-out  space  between 
my navel and breastbone begin to ache. the motherless 
place.  i  could  see  my  mother  in  the  closet,  the  stuck 
window, the suitcase on the floor. i heard the shouting, 
then the explosion. i almost doubled over. i lowered my 
arms,  but  i  didn't  open  my  eyes.  how  could  i  live  the  
whole rest of my life knowing these things? what could i 
ever  do  that  would  be  good  enough  to  make  them  go 
away?  how  come  we  couldn't  go  back  and  fix  the  bad 
things we did? 

 

219 

later my mind would remember the plagues god 
had been  fond  of  sending  early in his  career, the  ones 
designed to make the pharaoh change his mind and let 
moses take the people out of egypt. let my people go, 
moses said. i'd seen the plague of locusts at the movies, 
the sky filled with hordes of insects looking like kamikaze 
planes. back in my room  on the peach farm, when the 
bees  had  first  come  out  at  night,  i  had  imagined  they 
were sent as a special plague for t. ray. god saying, let 
my daughter  go,  and  maybe that's  exactly  what  they'd 
been, a plague that released me. 

but  here,  now,  surrounded  by  stinging  bees  on 
all  sides  and  the  motherless  place  throbbing  away,  i 
knew that these bees were not a plague at all. it felt like 
the queen's attendants were out here in a frenzy of love, 
caressing me in a thousand places. look who's here, it's 
lily. she is so weary and lost. come on, bee sisters. i was 
the stamen in the middle of a twirling flower. the center 
of all their comforting. 

"lily…  lily."  my  name  came  across  the  blue  

distances. "lily!" 

i  opened  my  eyes.  august  stared  through  her 
spectacles. the bees had shaken the pollen dust off their 
feet  and  were  starting  to  settle  back  into  the  hive.  i  
could see tiny grains of it drifting in the air. 

"are you okay?" august said. 

220 

 

i nodded. was i? i had no idea. 
"you know, don't you, that the two of us need to 
have  a  good  talk.  and  this  time  not  about  me.  about  
you." 

i wished i could do like the bees, just bump her 
forehead with a warning, tap it with my finger. i got my 
eye on you. be careful. don't go any further. 

"i suppose," i answered. 
"what about right now?" 
"not right now." 
"but, lily—" 
"i'm starved," i said. "i think i'll go on back to the 

house and see if lunch is ready." 

i didn't wait for her to speak. walking to the pink 
house, i could almost see the end of the line. i touched 
the  place  on  my  shirt  where  i'd  stuck  the  black  mary.  
she was starting to come unglued. 

• • • 
the  whole  house  smelled 

like 

fried  okra. 
rosaleen was setting the table in the kitchen while may 
dipped  down  in  the  grease and brought  up the  golden 
brown  kernels.  i didn't  know what had  brought on the 
okra, since it was usually bologna sandwiches and more 
bologna sandwiches. 

may  had  not  had  a  crying 

jag  since  june 
performed  her  tomato-throwing  fit,  and  we  were  all 

 

221 

holding our breath. after going this long, i worried that 
even  something  as  simple  as  burned  okra  might  send 
her over the edge. 

i said i was hungry, and rosaleen said to hold my 
wild  horses.  her  lower  lip  was  plumped  out  with  red 
rose  snuff.  the  smell  followed  her  around  the  kitchen 
like  it  was  on  a  leash,  a  combination  of  allspice,  fresh 
earth and rotten leaves. between the okra and the snuff 
i could not get a decent breath. rosaleen walked across 
the back porch, leaned out the door, and spit a tiny jet 
stream across the hydrangeas. 

nobody could spit like rosaleen. i'd had fantasies 
of  her  winning  a  hundred  dollars  in  a  spitting  contest 
and the two of us going to a nice motel in atlanta and 
ordering  room  service  with  the  prize  money.  it  had 
always been my fond wish to stay in a motel, but at that 
moment if you had told me i could've had my choice of 
luxury motels with heated pools and television sets right 
in the room, i would've turned it down flat for the pink 
house. 

there had been a few times, though, just after i 
woke  up,  when  i  thought  about  my  old  house,  and  i 
would miss it for a second or two before i remembered 
kneeling on the kitchen floor with grits digging into my 
kneecaps or trying to step around a great big pile of t. 
ray's nasty mood but usually landing right in it. i would 

 

222 

remember him tearing into me, shouting jesus h. christ, 
jesus h. christ! the worst slap across the face i ever got 
was when i interrupted him to ask just what did the h. 
stand  for  anyway?  one quick  walk  down  memory  lane 
and the old home feeling would blow right over. i would 
take the pink house any day. 

zach shuffled into the kitchen behind august. 
"my, my. okra and pork chops for lunch. what's 

this about?" august asked may. 

may sidled over to her and said in a low voice, "it 
has  been  five  days  since  i've  been  to  the  wall,"  and  i  
could  see  how  proud  of  this  fact  she  was,  how  she 
wanted  to  believe  her  days  of  hysterical  crying  were 
behind her, how this okra lunch was a celebration. 

august  smiled  at  her.  "five  days,  really?  well, 

that deserves a feast," she said. and may, she beamed. 

zach plopped down in a chair. 
"did  you  finish  delivering  the  honey?"  august 

asked him. 

"everywhere  but  mr.  clayton's  law  office,"  he 
said. he was fidgeting with everything in sight. first the 
place mat, then a loose thread on his shirt. like he was 
bursting to say something. 

august looked him over. "you got something on 

your mind?" 

 

223 

"you  won't  believe  what  people  downtown  are 
saying," he said. "they're saying jack palance is coming 
to tiburon this weekend and bringing a colored woman 
with him." 

we all stopped what we were doing and looked 

at each other. 

"who's  jack  palance?"  rosaleen  said.  even 
though we hadn't started lunch yet, she had bitten into 
a piece of pork chop and was chewing and talking with 
her mouth open. i tried to catch her eye, pointing to my 
closed mouth, hoping she'd get the message. 

"he's a movie star," said zach. 
june  snorted.  "well,  how  dumb  is  that?  what 

would a movie star be doing in tiburon?" 

zach  shrugged.  "they  say  his  sister  lives  here, 
and he's coming to visit and intends to take this colored 
woman  to  the  movie  theater  this  friday.  not  to  the  
balcony, but downstairs in the white section." 

august turned to may. "why don't you go out to 
the garden and pick some fresh tomatoes to go with our 
lunch?" she said, then waited till may was out the door. i 
could tell she was afraid jack palance trying to integrate 
the  movie  theater  might  ruin  may's  okra  feast.  "are 
people stirred up about this?" she asked zach. her eyes 
looked serious. 

 

224 

"yes,  ma'am,"  he  said.  "in  garret's  hardware 
there  were  white  men  talking  about  standing  guard 
outside the theater." 

"lord, here we go," said rosaleen. 
june  made  a  pffff  sound  with  her  lips  while 
august shook her head, and it washed over me for the 
first time in my life just how much importance the world 
had ascribed to skin pigment, how lately it seemed that 
skin  pigment  was  the  sun  and  everything  else  in  the 
universe was the orbiting planets. ever since school let 
out this summer, it had been nothing but skin pigment 
every live-long day. i was sick of it. 

in  sylvan  we'd  had  a  rumor  at  the  first  of  the  
summer about a busload of people from new york city 
showing up to integrate the city pool. talk about a panic. 
we had a citywide emergency on our hands, as there is 
no greater affliction for the southern mind than people 
up north coming down to fix our way of life. after that 
was the whole mess with the men at the esso station. it 
seemed  to  me  it  would  have  been  better  if  god  had  
deleted skin pigment altogether. 

as may came back into the kitchen, august said, 
"let's  enjoy  our  meal,"  which  meant  jack  palance  was 
not  a 
lunch  topic.  may  plopped  down  three  big 
tomatoes,  and while she  and rosaleen  sliced them  up, 
august went to the den and put a nat king cole record 

 

225 

on the player—a machine so old the records would not 
even drop  automatic fashion.  she was  crazy about  nat 
king  cole,  and  she  returned,  with  the  volume  up, 
frowning  in  that  way  people  do  when  they  bite  into 
something and it tastes so delicious they appear to be in 
pain over it. june turned up her nose. she only cared for 
beethoven and that whole group. she went and turned 
the sound down. "i can't think," she said. 

august  said,  "you  know  what?  you  think  too 
much. it would do you a world of good to stop thinking 
and just go with your feelings once in a blue moon." 

june said she would take her lunch in her room, 

thank you. 

i  guess  that  was  just  as  well,  because  i  was 
looking at the tomatoes may and rosaleen were slicing 
and rehearsing in my head how i would say, so will you 
have  some  tomatoes,  june?  don't  you  love  tomatoes? 
now at least i would be saved from that. 

we ate till we were tired out from eating, which 
is  the  way  people  in  south  carolina  eat  at  family  
reunions.  zach  pushed  back  from  the  table,  saying  he 
was heading to clayton forrest's office to leave a dozen 
jars of honey. 

"can i go?" i asked. 
august  knocked  over  her  sweet  tea,  a  thing  so  
unlike her. you did not associate spills with august. with 

 

226 

may, for sure, but not august. tea ran across the table 
and onto the floor. i thought this might set may off, the 
tragedy of a spilled drink. but she only got up, humming 
"oh!  susanna"  without  real  urgency,  and  grabbed  a 
towel. 

"i don't know, lily," august said. 
"please." all i really wanted was some time with 
zach and to expand my world by visiting the office of a 
real-life lawyer. 

"well, all right," she said. 
• • • 
the  office  was  situated  one  block  off  main 
street, where rosaleen and i had paraded into town that 
sunday more than three weeks ago. it didn't look like my 
idea  of  a  law  office.  the  whole  operation  was  really  a 
large house, white with black shutters and a wraparound 
porch  with  big  rocking  chairs,  which  must  been  for 
people to collapse into with relief after they'd won their 
cases. a sign on the lawn said 

clayton 

attorney at law. 

forrest, 

his secretary was a white lady who looked about 
eighty years old. she sat at a desk in the reception area, 
putting  on  fire-red  lipstick.  her  hair  was  permed  into 
tight curls that had a faint blue cast. 

 

227 

"hi,  miss  lacy,"  zach  said.  "i  brought  more 

honey." 

she  worked  the  lipstick  back  into  the  tube, 
looking mildly annoyed. "more honey," she said, shaking 
her head. she let out an overdone sigh and reached into 
a drawer. "the money for the last batch is in here." she 
dropped an envelope onto the desk. 

she looked me over. "you're new." 
"i'm lily," i said. 
"she's staying with august," zach explained. 
"you're staying in her house?" she said. 
i wanted to tell her that her lipstick was bleeding 
into  the  wrinkles  around  her  lips.  "yes,  ma'am,  i'm 
staying there." 
"well, 

i'll  be,"  she  said.  she  gathered  her 
pocketbook  and  stood  up.  "i've  got  an appointment  at 
the dentist. put the jars over there on the table." 

i  pictured  her  whispering  the  news  to  all  the 
people in the waiting room who were about to get their 
cavities  drilled.  this  white  girl,  lily,  is  staying  with  the 
colored boatwright sisters. 

now, doesn't that seem strange to you? 
as  she  left,  mr.  forrest  came  out  of  his  office. 
the first thing i noticed was his red suspenders. i'd never 
seen  a  thin  person wear suspenders,  and  it  was  a  nice 
look, the way it matched his red bow tie. he had sandy 

 

228 

hair,  and  bushy  eyebrows  that  curled  toward  his  blue 
eyes, and smile crinkles in his face that signaled a good 
person.  so  good  that  apparently  he  couldn't  bring 
himself to get rid of miss lacy. 

he  looked  at  me.  "and  who  would  this  pretty 
young lady be?" "lily uh—" i could not remember what 
last  name  i  was  currently  using.  i  think  it  was  because  
he'd referred to me as pretty, which had been a shock to 
my system. "just lily." 

i stood there 
looking gawky, with one foot tucked behind the 
other. "i'm staying with august till i go live with my aunt 
in virginia." him being a lawyer, i worried he might ask 
me to take a lie-detector test. 

"how nice. august is a good friend of mine," he 

said. "i hope you're enjoying your stay?" 

"yes, sir. very much." 
"what  case  are  you  working  on?"  asked  zach, 
stuffing  the  envelope  of  honey  money  into  his  pocket 
and  setting  the  box  of  jars  on  the  side  table  by  the 
window. it had a framed honey for sale sign on it. 

"run-of-the-mill  stuff.  deeds,  wills. 

i  got 
something for you, though. come on back to the office 
and i'll show you." 

 

229 

"i'll just wait out here and arrange the honey," i 
said,  hating  to  intrude  but  mostly  feeling  uncommonly 
awkward around him. 

"you sure? you're welcome to come, too." 
"i'm sure. i like it out here." 
they disappeared down a hallway. i heard a door 
close. a car horn on the street. the blast of the window 
air  conditioner  that  dripped  water  into  a  dog  bowl  on 
the  floor.  i  stacked  the  jars  in  a  pyramid.  seven  on  
bottom, four in the middle, and one on top, but it looked 
misshapen, so i took it apart and settled for plain rows. 

i  went  over  and  inspected  the  pictures  that 
covered  one  whole  wall.  first  was  a  diploma  from  the 
university of south carolina and then another one from 
duke university. next was a picture of mr. forrest on a 
boat,  wearing  sunglasses  and  holding  a  fish  about  my 
size.  after  that,  mr.  forrest  shaking  hands  with  bobby 
kennedy.  last,  mr.  forrest  and  a  small  blond-headed 
girl,  standing  in  the  ocean.  she  was  jumping  over  a 
wave. the spray made a blue fan behind her, a peacock 
tail of water, and he was helping her, lifting her up and 
over it with his hand, smiling down on her. i bet he knew 
her  favorite  color,  what  she  ate  for  afternoon  snacks, 
everything she loved. 

i went and sat on one of the two red sofas in the 

room. 

 

230 

williams. my made-up last name finally came to 
me.  i  counted  the  plants  in  the  room.  four.  the 
floorboards  from  the  desk  to  the  front  door.  fifteen. 
closing my eyes, i pictured the ocean stretched out the 
color of fresh-polished silver, the white froth on it, light 
scattering everywhere. i saw myself jumping a wave. t. 
ray  held  my  hand,  pulling  me  up  and  over.  i  had  to 
concentrate so hard to make this happen. 

thirty-two names for love. 
was  it unthinkable  he  could  speak  one of  them 
to  me,  even  the  one  reserved  for  lesser  things  like 
peanuts in your coke? was it so out of the question that 
t. ray knew i loved the color blue? what if he was home 
missing me, saying, why oh why didn't i love her better? 
miss lacy's telephone sat right there on her desk. 
i picked up the receiver and dialed 0 for operator. "i am 
making  a  collect  call,"  i  told  her,  and  gave  her  the  
number. almost faster than i would've believed, i heard 
the  phone  in  my  house  ringing.  i  stared  down  the 
hallway at the closed door and counted the rings. 

three, four, five, six. 
"hello."  his  voice  caused  my  stomach  to  pitch  
into my throat. i was unprepared for the way it buckled 
my knees. i had to sit down in miss lacy's chair spraddle-
legged. 

 

231 

"i  have  a  collect  call  from  lily  owens,"  the  

operator said. 

"will you accept the charge?" 
"you're  goddamn  right  i'll  accept  it,"  he  said. 
then,  without  waiting  for  me  to  say  p-turkey,  he  
launched right in. "lily, where the hell are you?" 

i  had  to  hold  the  phone  from  my  eardrum  for 
fear of him rupturing it. "t. ray, i'm sorry i had to leave, 
but—" 

"you  tell  me  where  you  are  right  now,  do  you 
hear  me?  do  you  have  any  idea  the  trouble you're in? 
busting  rosaleen  out  of  the  hospital—holy  shit,  what 
were you thinking?" 
"i was only—" 
"i'll tell you what you were. you were a goddamn 
fool who went looking for trouble and found it. because 
of  you  i  can't  walk  down  the  street  in  sylvan  without 
people  staring  at  me.  i've  had  to  stop  everything  and 
search  for  you  all  over  creation,  and  meanwhile  the 
peaches have gone to hell." 

"well, quit yelling, all right? i said i was sorry." 
"your  sorry  ain't  worth  a  shitload  of  peaches, 

lily. i swear to god—" 

"i  called  because 

i  was 

just  wondering 

something." 

"where are you? answer me." 

232 

 

i squeezed the arm of the chair till my knuckles 
hurt. "i was wondering, do you know what my favorite 
color is?" 

"jesus  christ.  what  are  you  talking  about?  you 

tell me where you are." 

"i said, do you know what my favorite color is?" 
"i know one thing, and that's i'm gonna find you, 
lily,  and  when  i  do,  i'm  gonna  tear  your  behind  to 
pieces—" 

i lowered the receiver back to the cradle and sat 
on the sofa again. i sat in the brightness of the afternoon 
and watched the hem of light under the venetian blinds. 
i told myself, don't you cry. don't you dare cry. so what 
if he doesn't know the color you love best? so what? 

zach  returned  holding  a  big  brown  book  that 
looked  half  moldy  with  age.  "look  what  mr.  clayton 
gave  me,"  he  said,  and  honestly,  you  would  have 
thought  it  was  a  six-pound  baby  he'd  birthed  by  the 
proud look of him. 

he  turned  it  over  so  i  could  read  the  binding. 
south carolina legal reports 1889. zach rubbed his hand 
across  the  front,  and  little  flecks  of  it  fell  off  onto  the 
floor. "i'm starting my law library." 

"that's nice," i said. 
mr.  forrest  stepped  closer,  staring  at  me  with 

such intensity i thought i must need to wipe my nose. 

 

233 

"zach says you're from spartanburg county, that 

your parents both died?" 

"yes, sir." one thing i didn't want was to get on 
the witness  stand right here in his office and have him 
fire lawyer questions at me. an hour from now rosaleen 
and i could be packing for prison. 

"what brings you—" 
"i really do need to get back." i put my hand low 

on my stomach. 

"i'm having a little female trouble." i tried to look 
very female and mysterious, slightly troubled by internal 
things they could not imagine and did not want to. it had 
been my  experience for  nearly a year that uttering  the 
words  "female  trouble"  could  get  me  into  places  i  
wanted to go and out of places i didn't. 
"oh," said zach. "well, let's go." 
"nice to meet you, mr. forrest," i said. 
clutching my abdomen. 
a small wince. walking slowly to the door. 
"believe me, lily," he said, calling after me, "the 

pleasure was all mine." 

• • • 
have  you  ever  written  a  letter  you  knew  you 
could  never  mail  but  you  needed  to  write  it  anyway? 
back in my room at the honey house, i wrote a letter to 
t. ray, during which i broke the points off three pencils, 

 

234 

and the  words… well, they looked like they'd been laid 
on the paper with branding irons. 

dear t. ray, 
i am sick to death of you yelling at me. i am not 
deaf i am only stupid for calling you up. if you were being 
tortured by martians and the only thing that could save 
you was telling them my favorite color, you would die on 
the  spot.  what  was  i  thinking?  all  i  had  to  do  was 
remember the father's day card i made for you when i 
was nine and still hoping for love. do you remember it, 
well  of  course  you  don't.  i  do,  because  i  nearly  killed 
myself working on it. i never told you i was up half the 
night with a dictionary looking up words to go with the 
letters  in  daddy.  i  got  the  idea,  not  that  you  are 
interested, from mrs. poole who had us do this in sunday 
school  with  the  word  joy.  j—jesus;  o—others;  y—
yourself this is the correct order for life, she said, and if 
you  follow  it,  you  will  have  joy,  joy,  joy.  well,  i  tried  
that,  putting  myself  last  left  and  right,  and  i  am  still 
waiting for joy to show up. so the exercise was good for 
nothing  except  for  giving  me  the  idea  for  your  card.  i 
thought if i spelled out the meaning of daddy to you, it 
would help you along. 

i was trying to say, here, try these things, i will so 
like  delightful, 

i  used  words 

appreciate 
determined to be kind. 

it. 

 

235 

i expected it to get propped on your dresser, and 
the next day i find it on the telephone table where you 
have peeled a peach on top of it, and the skin and pit are 
stuck to the paper. i have always wanted to say to you 
that was despicable. 
d—despicable 

a—angry 
d—dud 
of 
d—disapppointment 
y—yoke around my neck 

a 

father 

writing  this 

is  not  the  jesus-others-yourself 
philosophy  of  life,  but  it  brings  me  j-o-y  to  finally  say 
these things to your face. 

love, lily 
p.s.  i  do  not  for  one  half  second  believe  my 

mother left me. 

i  read  the  letter  back,  then  tore  it  into  tiny 
pieces. i felt relief to get all that out of my system, but i 
had  lied  about  it  bringing  me  joy.  i  almost  wanted  to  
write  another  letter  that  i  would  not  send  and  say  i'm  
sorry. 

that  night,  when  the  pink  house  was  sound 
asleep,  i  came  creeping  in,  needing  the  bathroom.  i 
never worried about finding my way through the house, 
as august left a trail of night-lights on from the kitchen 
to the bathroom. 

 

236 

i had come barefoot, collecting dew on the soles 
of  my  feet.  sitting  on  the  toilet,  trying  to  pee  very  
quietly, i could see crepe myrtle petals stuck to my toes. 
over  my  head,  rosaleen's  snores  sifted  through  the 
ceiling. it is always a relief to empty your bladder. 

better  than  sex,  that's  what  rosaleen  said.  as  
good as it felt, though, i sincerely hoped she was wrong. 
i headed toward the kitchen, but then something 
made me turn around; your guess is as good as mine. i 
walked in the opposite direction to the parlor. stepping 
inside,  i  heard  a  sigh  so  deep  and  satisfying  that  for  a 
moment i didn't realize it had come from my own lungs. 
the  candle  in  the  red  glass  beside  the  mary 
statue still burned, looking like a tiny red heart in a cave 
of darkness, pulsing out light to the world. august kept it 
going night and day. it reminded me of the eternal flame 
they'd put on john f kennedy's grave that will never go 
out no matter what. 

our  lady  of  chains  looked  so  different  late  at 
night,  her  face  older  and  darker,  her  fist  bigger  than  i 
remembered.  i  wondered  about  all  the  places  she'd 
traveled out there on the waters of the world, all the sad 
things that had been whispered to her, the things she'd 
endured. 

sometimes, after we'd done our prayers with the 
beads, i could not remember how to cross myself right, 

 

237 

getting  it  mixed  up  like  you  would  expect  any  baptist-
raised person to do. whenever that happened, i just put 
my  hand  over  my  heart  like  we  did  in  school  for  the  
pledge of allegiance. i felt one was as good as another, 
and  that's  what  happened  now—my  hand  just  went 
automatically to my heart and stayed there. 

i told her, fix me, please—fix me. help me know 
what to do. forgive me. is my mother all right up there 
with god? don't let them find us.  if they find us, don't 
let  them  take  me  back.  if  they  find  us,  keep  rosaleen 
from being killed. let june love me. let t. ray love me. 
help  me  stop  lying.  make  the  world  better.  take  the 
meanness out of people's hearts. 

i moved closer, so now i could see the heart on 
her  chest.  in  my  mind  i  heard  the  bees  fanning  their 
wings down in the dark music box. i saw august and me 
with our ears against the hive. i remembered her voice 
the first time she told the story of our lady of chains. 
send  them  rescue,  send  them  consolation,  send  them 
freedom. 

i reached out and traced black mary's heart with 
my  finger.  i  stood  with  the  petals  on  my  toes  and  
pressed my palm flat and hard against her heart. i live in 
a hive of darkness, and you are my mother, i told her. 
you are the mother of thousands. 
 

 

 

238 

chapter nine 

the  whole  fabric  of  honey  bee  society 
depends on communication—on an innate ability to 
send and receive messages, to encode and decode 
information. 

—the honey bee 
 
july  28  was  a  day  for  the  record  books.  i  look  
back on it and what comes to me are people going over 
niagara falls in barrels. ever since i'd heard about that, 
i'd  tried  to  imagine  people  crouched  inside,  bobbing 
along peacefully like a rubber duck in a child's bathtub, 
and suddenly the water  turning  choppy  and the  barrel 
starting  to  thrash  around  while  a  roar  grows  in  the 
distance.  i knew  they were in there saying,  shitbucket, 
what was i thinking? 

at eight o'clock in the morning it hit 94, with the 
ambitious plan of reaching 103 before noon. i woke up 
with august shaking my shoulder, saying it was gonna be 
a scorcher, get up, we had to water the bees. 

 

239 

i  climbed  into  the  honey  wagon  with  my  hair 
uncombed,  with  may  handing  me  buttered  toast  and 
orange juice through the window and rosaleen sticking 
in thermoses of water, both of them practically running 
alongside  the  truck  while  august  rolled  out  of  the 
driveway. i felt like the red cross springing to action to 
save the bee queendom. 

in  the  back  of  the  truck  august  had  gallons  of 
sugar  water  already  made  up.  "when  it  gets  over  a 
hundred," she  said,  "the flowers  dry up  and there's  no 
food  for  the  bees.  they  stay  in  the  hives  fanning 
themselves. sometimes they just roast." 

i  felt  like  we  might  roast  alive  ourselves.  you 
could  not  touch  the  door  handle  for  fear  of  a  third-
degree burn. sweat ran between my breasts and sopped 
my underwear band. august turned on the radio for the 
weather,  but  what  we  heard  was  how  ranger  7  had 
finally  landed  on  the  surface  of  the  moon  in  a  place 
called the sea of clouds, how police were looking for the 
bodies of those three civil rights workers in mississippi, 
and the terrible things that had happened in the gulf of 
tonkin. it ended with a story about what was happening 
"closer  to  home,"  how  black  people  from  tiburon, 
florence,  and orangeburg  were  marching today  all  the 
way to columbia asking the governor to enforce the civil 
rights act. 

 

240 

august  turned  it  off.  enough  was  enough.  you 

cannot fix the whole world. 

"i've  already  watered  the  hives  around  the 

house," she said. 

"zach is taking care of the hives on the east side 

of the county. so you and i've got the west side." 
rescuing bees took us the entire morning. 
driving  back  into  remote  corners  of  the  woods 
where  there  were  barely  roads,  we  would  come  upon 
twenty-five  beehives  up  on  slats  like  a  little  lost  city 
tucked back in there. we lifted the covers and filled the 
feeders  with  sugar  water.  earlier  we'd  spooned  dry 
sugar  into  our  pockets,  and  now,  just  as  a  bonus,  we  
sprinkled it on the feeding rims. 

i  managed  to  get  stung  on  my  wrist  while  
replacing a lid onto a hive box. august scraped out the 
stinger. 
"i
betrayed. 

 was  sending  them  love,"  i

 said,

 feeling  

august said, "hot weather makes the bees out of 
sorts, i don't care how much love you send them." she 
pulled a small bottle of olive oil and bee pollen from her 
free pocket and rubbed my skin—her patented remedy. 
it was something i'd hoped never to test out. 

"count yourself initiated," she said. "you can't be 

a true beekeeper without getting stung." 

 

241 

a true beekeeper. the words caused a fullness in 
me, and right at that moment an explosion of blackbirds 
lifted off the ground in a clearing a short distance away 
and  filled  up  the  whole  sky.  i  said  to  myself,  will  
wonders  never  cease?  i  would  add  that  to  my  list  of 
careers. a writer, an english teacher, and a beekeeper. 

"do  you  think  i  could  keep  bees  one  day?"  i 

asked. 

august  said,  "didn't  you  tell  me  this  past  week 
one of the things you loved was bees and honey? now, if 
that's so, you'll be a fine beekeeper. actually, you can be 
bad at something, lily, but if you love doing it, that will 
be enough." 

the  sting  shot  pain  all  the  way  to  my  elbow,  
causing  me  to  marvel  at  how  much  punishment  a 
minuscule creature can inflict. i'm prideful enough to say 
i  didn't  complain.  after  you  get  stung,  you  can't  get 
unstung no matter how much you whine about it. i just 
dived back into the riptide of saving bees. 

• • • 
when  we  had  watered  all  the  hives  of  tiburon 
and sprinkled enough sugar to cause a human being to 
gain  fifty  pounds,  we  drove  home  hot,  hungry,  and 
nearly  drowned  in  our  own  sweat.  pulling  into  the 
driveway, we found rosaleen and may sipping sweet tea 
on the back porch. may said she'd left our lunches in the 

 

242 

refrigerator, cold pork-chop sandwiches and slaw. while 
we ate, we heard june upstairs in her room playing the 
cello like something had died. 

we  scarfed  down  every  morsel  without  talking, 
then  pushed  back  from  the  table.  we were  wondering 
how to get our tired selves to a standing position when 
we heard squealing and laughing, the kind you're apt to 
hear at a school recess. august and i dragged ourselves 
to the porch to see. and there were may and rosaleen 
running through the water sprinkler, barefoot and fully 
clothed. they had gone berserk. 

rosaleen's  muumuu  was  sopped  and  plastered 
to her body, and may was catching water in the bowl of 
her dress skirt and tossing it up across her face. sunlight 
hit the hair sheen on her braids and lit them up. 

"well, isn't this the living end?" august said. 
when we got out there, rosaleen picked up the 
sprinkler  and  aimed it  at  us.  "you  come over  here and 
you gonna get wet," she said, and splat, we were hit full 
in the chest with ice-cold water. 

rosaleen  turned  the  sprinkler  head  down  and 
filled may's dress. "you come over here and you gonna 
get  wet,"  may  said,  echoing  rosaleen,  and  she  came 
after  us,  pitching  the  contents  of  her  skirt  across  our 
backs. 

 

243 

i  can  tell  you  this  much:  neither  one  of  us  

protested that loudly. 

in the  end we stood there  and  let  ourselves  be 

drenched by two crazy black women. 

all  four  of  us  turned  into  water  nymphs  and 
danced around the cool spray, just the way it must have 
been when indians  danced circles  around  blazing  fires. 
squirrels  and  carolina  wrens  hopped  as  close  as  they 
dared and drank from the puddles, and you could almost 
see  the  blades  of  brown  grass  lift  themselves  up  and 
turn green. 

then  the  porch  door  banged,  and  here  came 
june with her dander  up. i must have been drunk with 
water  and  air  and  dancing,  because  i  picked  up  the 
sprinkler  and  said,  "you  come  over  here  and  you're 
gonna get wet." then i hosed her. 

she began to holler. "damn it to hell!" i knew this 
was  going  down  the  wrong  path,  but  i  couldn't  stop.  i 
was  seeing  myself  as  the  fire  department  and  june  as 
the raging inferno. 

she  yanked  the  sprinkler  out  of  my  hands  and 
turned  the spray  on  me.  some  of  the water rushed  up 
my nose and burned. i yanked at the sprinkler, and each 
of us held on to one side of it while it blasted away at 
our  stomachs  and  chins.  we  went  to  our  knees, 
wrestling for it, the geyser weaving between us, her eyes 

 

244 

staring at me, close and bright with beads of water on 
her eyelashes. 

i  heard  may  start  to  hum  "oh!  susanna."  i 
laughed to let her know it was all right, but i wouldn't let 
go. i would not let june boatwright win. 

rosaleen said, "they say if you aim the hose on 
two locked dogs, they'll turn loose, but i guess that ain't 
always so." 

august  laughed,  and  i  saw  the  softening  come 
around june's eyes, how she was trying not to laugh, but 
it  was  like  the  dutch  boy  pulling  his  finger  out  of  the  
dike—the minute she softened her eyes, the whole thing 
collapsed.  i  could  almost  see  her  smack  her  forehead, 
thinking,  i  am  wrestling  with  a  fourteen-year-old  girl 
over a garden sprinkler. this is ridiculous. 

she  let  go  and  sprawled  back  on  the  grass  in  
convulsions of laughter. i plopped down next to her and 
laughed, too. we could not stop. i wasn't exactly sure of 
everything we were laughing about—i was just glad we 
were doing it together. 

when we got up, june said, "lord, i feel woozy, 
like  somebody  has  pulled  the  plugs  in  my  feet  and 
drained me out." 

rosaleen, may, and august  had returned  to the 
business of being water nymphs. i looked back down at 
the ground where our bodies had lain side by side, the 

 

245 

wet  grasses  pressed  down,  perfect  depressions  in  the 
earth.  i stepped  over  them with  the  utmost  care,  and, 
seeing how careful i was, june stepped over them, too, 
and then, to my shock, she hugged me. june boatwright 
hugged  me  while  our  clothes  made  sweet,  squishy 
sounds up and down our bodies. 

• • • 
if  the  heat  goes  over  104  degrees  in  south 
carolina, you have to go to bed. it is practically the law. 
some  people  might  see  it  as  shiftless  behavior,  but 
really,  when  we're  lying  down  from  the  heat,  we're 
giving our minds time to browse around for new ideas, 
wondering at  the true  aim of  life,  and generally letting 
things  pop  into  our  heads  that  need  to.  in  the  sixth 
grade there was a boy in my class who had a steel plate 
in  his  skull  and  was  always  complaining  how  test 
answers  could  never  get  through  to  him.  our  teacher 
would say, "give me a break." 

in a way, though, the boy was right. every human 
being  on  the  face  of  the  earth  has  a  steel  plate  in  his  
head, but if you lie down now and then and get still as 
you can, it will slide open like elevator doors, letting in 
all the secret thoughts that have been standing around 
so  patiently,  pushing  the  button  for  a  ride  to  the  top. 
the  real  troubles  in  life  happen  when  those  hidden 

 

246 

doors  stay  closed  for  too  long.  but  that's  just  my 
opinion. 

august,  may, 

june,  and  rosaleen  were 
supposedly  over in the pink house  in  their  rooms lying 
under the fans with the lights on. in the honey house i 
reclined on my  cot  and told  myself  i could  think  about 
anything  i  wanted,  except my mother,  so  naturally  she 
was the only thing that wanted on the elevator. 

i could feel things unraveling around me. all the 
fraying edge of the dream world. pull one wrong thread 
and i would be standing in wreckage to my elbows. ever 
since i'd called t. ray, i wanted so badly to tell rosaleen 
about it. to say, if you've been wondering whether my 
leaving  has  caused  t.  ray  to  examine  his  heart,  or 
change  his  ways,  don't  waste  your  time.  but  i  couldn't 
bring myself to admit to her that i'd cared enough to call 
him. 

what was wrong with me that i was living here 
as if i had nothing to hide? i lay on the cot and stared at 
the  glaring  square  of  window,  exhausted.  it  takes  so 
much  energy  to  keep  things  at  bay.  let  me  on,  my  
mother was saying. let me on the damn elevator. well, 
fine.  i  pulled  out  my  bag  and  examined  my  mother's 
picture. 

 

247 

i  wondered  what  it  had  been  like  to  be  inside 
her,  just  a  curl  of  flesh  swimming  in  her  darkness,  the  
quiet things that had passed between us. 

the  wanting  her  was  still  in  me,  but  it  wasn't 
nearly  so  fierce  and  raging  as  before.  pulling  on  her 
gloves, i noticed how tight they fit all of a sudden. by the 
time i was sixteen, they would feel like baby gloves on 
my hands. i would be alice in wonderland after she ate 
the cake and grew twice her size. my palms would split 
the seams of the gloves, and i would never wear them 
again. i peeled the gloves from my sweaty hands and felt 
a  wave  of  jitteriness,  the  old  saw-edged  guilt,  the 
necklace  of  lies  i  could  not  stop  wearing,  the  fear  of  
being cast out of the pink house. 

"no,"  i  breathed.  the  word  took  a  long  time  to  
work its way to my throat. a scared whisper. no, i will 
not think about this. i will not feel this. i will not let this 
ruin  the  way  things  are.  no.  i  decided  that  lying  down 
from the heat was a hick idea. i gave up and walked to 
the  pink  house  for  something  cold  to  drink.  if  i  ever  
managed  to  get  to  heaven  after  everything  i'd  done,  i 
hoped  i  would  get  just  a  few  minutes  for  a  private  
conference with god. i wanted to say, look, i know you 
meant  well  creating  the  worm  and  all,  but  how  could 
you  let  it  get  away  from  you  like  this?  how  come  you 

 

248 

couldn't  stick  with  your  original 
people's lives were a mess. 

idea  of  paradise? 

• • • 
when i came into the kitchen, may was sitting on 
the floor with her legs straight out and a box of graham 
crackers in her lap. that would be about right—me and 
may the only two who couldn't lie peaceful on the bed 
for five minutes. 

"i saw a roach," she said, reaching into a bag of 
marshmallows  that  i  hadn't  noticed  was  there.  she 
pulled one out  and pinched off  little pieces of it. crazy 
may. 

i opened the refrigerator and stood there staring 
at  the  contents  like  i  was  waiting  for  the  grape-juice  
bottle  to  jump  in  my  hand  and  say,  here,  drink  me.  i  
could  not  seem  to  register  what  may  was  doing.  
sometimes  things  of  magnitude  settle  over  you  with 
excruciating  slowness.  say  you  break  your  ankle  and 
don't feel it hurting till you've walked another block. 

i had nearly finished a glass of juice before i let 
myself  look  at  the  little  highway  of  broken  graham 
crackers  and  marshmallow  bits 
that  may  was 
constructing across the floor, how it started at the sink 
and angled toward  the door,  thick with  golden  crumbs 
and smudges of sticky white. 

 

249 

"the roaches will follow this out the door," may 

said. "it works every time." 

i don't know how long i stared at the line on the 
floor, at may's face turned toward mine, eager for me to 
say  something,  but  i  couldn't  think  what  to  say.  the 
room  filled  with  the  steady  whir  of  the  refrigerator 
motor. i felt a strange, thick feeling inside. a memory. i 
stood there waiting, letting it come … your mother was a 
lunatic when it came to bugs, t. ray had said. she used 
to  make 
trails  of  graham  cracker  crumbs  and 
marshmallows to lure roaches outside. 

i looked again at may. my mother couldn't have 
learned the roach trick from may, i thought. could she? 

ever  since  i'd  set  foot  in  the  pink  house,  some  
part of me had kept believing that my mother had been 
here. no, not believing it so much as daydreaming it and 
running  it through a maze of wishful thinking.  but now 
that the actual possibility seemed to be right in front of 
me,  it  seemed  so  far-fetched,crazy.  it  couldn't  be,  i 
thought again. i walked over and sat down at the table. 
shadows  from  late  afternoon  pushed  into  the  room. 
they  were  peach  tinted,  fading  in  and  out,  and  the 
kitchen was completely silent. even the refrigerator hum 
had died away.  may had turned back to  her  work.  she 
seemed oblivious to me sitting there. 

 

250 

 how  did  i

my  mother  could  have  learned  it  from  a  book,  
 know  that  

maybe  from  her  mother.
households everywhere didn't use this particular roach-
ridding  method?  i stood  up and walked  over  to may.  i 
felt a trembly feeling at the back of my knees. i put my 
hand on her shoulder. okay, i thought, here goes. i said, 
"may, did you ever know a deborah? deborah fontanel? 
a white woman from virginia? it would have been a long 
time ago." 

there wasn't a trace of cunning in may, and you 
could depend on her not to overthink her answers. she 
didn't look up, didn't pause, just said, "oh, yes, deborah 
fontanel. she stayed out there in the honey house. she 
was the sweetest thing." 

and there it was. there it all was. 
for a moment i felt light-headed. i had to reach 
for the countertop to steady myself. down on the floor 
the trail of crumbs and marshmallows looked half alive. 
i  had  a  million  more  questions,  but  may  had 
started humming "oh! susanna." she set down the box 
of  crackers  and  got  up  slowly,  starting  to  sniffle. 
something about deborah fontanel had set her off. 

"i think i'll go out to the wall for a little while," 
she  said.  and  that's  how  she  left  me,  standing  in  the 
kitchen, hot and breathless, the world tilted under me. 

 

251 

walking  to  the  honey  house,  i  concentrated  on 
my  feet  touching  down  on  the  hard-caked  dirt  in  the 
driveway,  the  exposed  tree  roots,  fresh-watered  grass, 
how the earth felt beneath me, solid, alive, ancient, right 
there every time my foot came down. there and there 
and there, always there. the things a mother should be. 
oh, yes, deborah fontanel. 

she  stayed  out  there  in  the  honey  house.  she 
was the sweetest thing. in the honey house i sat on the 
cot  with  my  knees  drawn  up,  hugging  them  with  my 
arms and making a shelf for the side of my face to rest 
on.  i looked at  the floor and the  walls with brand  new 
eyes. my mother had walked about in this room. 

a real person. 
not somebody i made up but a living, breathing 
person. the last thing i expected was to fall asleep, but 
when there's a blow to the system, all the body wants to 
do is go to sleep and dream on it. 

i  woke  an  hour  or  so  later  in  the  velvety  space  
where  you  don't  yet  remember  what  you've  dreamed. 
then suddenly the whole thing washed back to me. 

i am constructing a spiraling trail of honey across 
a room that seems to be in the honey house one minute 
and the next in my bedroom back in sylvan. i start it at a 
door i've never seen before and end it at the foot of my 
bed.  then  i  sit  on  the  mattress  and  wait.  the  door 

 

252 

opens.  in  walks  my  mother.  she  follows  the  honey, 
making twists and turns  across the room until she gets 
to my bed. she is smiling, so pretty, but then i see she is 
not  a  normal  person.  she  has  roach  legs  protruding 
through  her  clothes,  sticking  through  the  cage  of  her 
ribs, down her torso, six of them, three on each side. 

i  couldn't  imagine  who  sat  in  my  head  making 
this  stuff  up.  the  air  was  now  dusky  rose  and  cool 
enough  for  a  sheet.  i  pulled  it  around  my  legs.  my  
stomach felt icky, like i might throw up. 

if  i  told  you  right  now  that  i  never  wondered 
about  that  dream,  never  closed  my  eyes  and  pictured 
her with  roach  legs, never wondered  why she came  to 
me like that, with her worst nature exposed, i would be 
up to my old habit of lying. a roach is a creature no one 
can love, but you cannot kill it. it will go on and on and 
on. just try to get rid of it. 

• • • 
the  next  few  days  i  was  a  case  of  nerves.  i  
jumped out of my skin if somebody so much as dropped 
a nickel on the floor. at the dinner table i poked at my 
food  and  stared  into  space  like  i  was  in  a  trance.  
sometimes  the  picture  of  my  mother  with  roach  legs 
would leap into my head, and i would have to swallow a 
spoonful  of  honey  for  my  stomach.  i  was  so  antsy  i 
couldn't sit through five minutes of american bandstand 

 

253 

on television, when ordinarily i was glued to dick clark's 
every word. 

i walked around and around the house, pausing 
here  and  there  to  picture  my  mother  in  the  various 
rooms.  sitting  with  her  skirt  spread  over  the  piano 
bench.  kneeling  beside  our  lady.  studying  the  recipe 
collection  that  may  clipped  from  magazines  and  kept 
taped on the refrigerator. i would stare at these visions 
with  my  eyes  glazed  over,  only  to  look  up  and  see  
august, or june, or rosaleen watching me. they clucked 
their tongues and felt my face for fever. 

they said, "what's wrong? what's got into you?" 
i shook my head. "nothing," i lied. "nothing." 
in  truth  i  felt  as  if  my  life  was  stranded  out  on  
the  high  dive,  about  to  leap  into  unknown  waters. 
dangerous waters. i only wanted to postpone the plunge 
awhile,  to  feel  my  mother's  closeness  in  the  house,  to 
pretend i wasn't afraid of the story that had brought her 
here or that she might go and surprise me the way she 
had in the dream, turning up six-legged and ugly. 

i wanted to march up to august and ask why my 
mother had been here, but fear stopped me. i wanted to 
know,  and  i  didn't  want  to  know.  i  was  all  hung  up  in 
limbo. 

late  friday  afternoon,  after  we  had  finished 
cleaning  the  last  of  the  supers  and  storing  them  away,  

 

254 

zach  went  out  to  take  a  look  under  the  hood  of  the  
honey wagon. it was still acting funny and overheating, 
in spite of neil having worked on it. 

i wandered back to my room and sat on my cot. 
heat radiated from the window. i considered getting up 
to turn on the fan but only sat there staring through the 
panes  at  the  milky-blue  sky,  a  sad,  ragged  feeling 
catching hold inside. i could hear music coming from the 
truck  radio,  sam  cooke  singing  "another  saturday 
night,"  then  may  calling  across  the  yard  to  rosaleen, 
something about  getting the sheets off  the clothesline. 
and i was struck all at once how life was out there going 
through  its  regular  courses,  and  i  was  suspended, 
waiting,  caught  in  a  terrible  crevice  between  living  my 
life  and  not  living  it.  i  couldn't  go  on  biding  time  like 
there  was  no  end  of  it,  no  end  to  this  summer.  i  felt  
tears spring up.  i would have to come clean. whatever 
happened… well, it would just happen. 

i  went  over  to  the  sink  and  washed  my  face.  
taking a deep breath, i stuffed my mother's black mary 
picture and her photograph into my pocket and started 
toward the pink house to find august. 

i thought  we would sit down  on the end of  her 
bed, or out in the lawn chairs if the mosquitoes weren't 
bad. i imagined august would say, what's on your mind, 
lily? are we finally gonna have our talk? i would pull out 

 

255 

the  wooden  picture  and  tell  her  every  last  thing,  and 
then she would explain about my mother. 

if only that had happened, instead of what did. 
as i strode toward the house, zach called to me 
from the truck. "wanna ride to town with me? i've gotta 
get a new radiator hose before the store closes." 

"i'm going to talk to august," i said. 
he  slammed  down  the  hood  and  smeared  his 
hands front and back on his pants. "august is with sugar-
girl  in  the  parlor.  she  showed  up  crying.  something 
about otis  using their life savings to buy a secondhand 
fishing boat." 

"but i've  got something  really important to  talk 

to her about." 

"you'll  have  to  get  in  line,"  he  said.  "come  on,  

we'll be back before sugar-girl leaves." 

i hesitated, then gave in. "all right." 
the  auto-parts  store  sat  two  doors  down  from 
the movie theater. as zach pulled into a parking space in 
front, i saw them—five or six white men standing by the 
ticket  booth.  they milled  around,  casting  quick  glances 
up  and  down  the  sidewalk,  like  they  were  waiting  for 
someone,  all  of  them  so  nicely  dressed,  wearing  ties 
with clips on them like store clerks and bank tellers. 

one man held what looked like the handle from 

a shovel. 

 

256 

zach turned  off  the honey wagon and stared at 
them through the windshield. a dog, an old beagle with 
an age-white face, wandered out of the auto-parts store 
and began  to  sniff  at something  on  the sidewalk.  zach 
drummed his fingers on the steering wheel and sighed. 
and i suddenly realized: it was friday, and they were out 
here waiting for jack palance and the colored woman. 

we sat there a minute not speaking, the sounds 
in the truck magnified. the squeak in a spring under the 
seat. the tapping of zach's fingers. the sharp way i was 
breathing. 

then one of the men yelled, causing me to jump 
and bang  my  knee  against  the glove  compartment.  he 
gazed  across  the  street  and  shouted,  "what  are  you 
staring at over there?" 

zach  and  i both  turned  and  looked  through  the 
back window. three teenaged colored boys stood on the 
sidewalk,  drinking  r.c.  colas  out  of  the  bottle  and 
glaring over at the men. 

"let's come back another time," i said. 
"it'll be okay," zach said. "you wait here." 
no, it won't be okay, i thought. 
as  he  slid  out  of  the  honey  wagon,  i  heard  the  
boys call zach's name. they crossed the street and came 
over to the honey wagon. glancing through the window 
at me, they gave zach a few playful shoves. one of them 

 

257 

waved his hand in front of his face like he'd bitten into a 
mexican pepper. "who you got in there?" he said. 

i looked at them, tried to smile, but my mind was 

on the men, who i could see were watching us. 

the  boys  saw  it,  too,  and  one  of  them—who  i 
would later find out was named jackson—said real loud, 
"you  gotta  be  dumb  as  dirt  to  believe  jack  palance  is  
coming to tiburon," and all of them laughed. even zach. 
the man holding the shovel handle walked right 
up to the truck bumper and stared at the boys with that 
same half smile, half sneer i had seen on t. ray's face a 
thousand  times,  the  sort  of  look  conjured  from  power 
without  benefit  of  love,  and  he  yelled,  "what  did  you 
say, boy?" 

the murmuring noise on the street fell away. the 
beagle  dropped  his  ears  and  slunk  off  under  a  parked 
car. i saw jackson bite down, causing a tiny ripple across 
his jaw. i saw him raise his r.c. cola bottle over his head. 
and throw it. 

i closed my eyes as it flew out of his hand. when 
i opened them again, there was glass sprayed across the 
sidewalk. the man with the shovel handle had dropped 
it and had his hand over his nose. blood seeped through 
his fingers. 

he  turned  back  to  the  other  men.  "that  nigger 
busted open my nose," he said, sounding more surprised 

 

258 

looked  around,  confused  for  a 
than  anything.  he 
moment,  then  headed  into  a  nearby  store,  dripping 
blood all the way. 

zach  and the  boys  stood by  the truck  door  in a 
little knot, stuck to the pavement, while the rest of the 
men walked over and formed a half circle around them, 
hemming them in against the truck. "which one of you 
threw that bottle?" one man said. 

the boys didn't open their mouths. 
"bunch of cowards," another man said. this one 
had picked up the shovel handle from the sidewalk and 
was jabbing it in the air in the boys' direction every time 
they moved. "just tell us which one of you it was, and 
you other three can go," he said. nothing. 

people  had  started  coming  out  of  the  stores, 
gathering in clumps. i stared at the back of zach's head. i 
felt  like  my  heart  had  a  little  ledge  on  it  and  i  was  
standing  there  leaning  as  far  out  as  i  could,  waiting  to  
see what zach would do. i knew that being a snitch was 
considered the lowest sort of person, but i wanted him 
to point his finger and say, the one over there. he did it. 
that way he could climb back into the honey truck and 
we would be on our way. 

come on, zach. 
he  turned  his  head  and  looked  at  me  from  the 
corner of his eye. then he shrugged his shoulder slightly, 

 

259 

and i knew it was over and done. he would never open 
his  mouth.  he  was  trying  to  say  to  me,  i'm  sorry,  but  
these are my friends. 

he chose to stand there and be one of them. 
i watched the policeman put zach and the other 
three  boys  in  his  car.  driving  away,  he  turned  on  his 
siren  and  red  light,  which  seemed  unnecessary,  but  i 
guess he didn't want to disappoint the audience on the 
sidewalk. 

i sat in the truck like i had frozen and the world 
had frozen  around me.  the  crowd  faded  away,  and all 
the  cars  downtown  went  home  one  by  one.  people 
closed up their stores. i stared through the windshield as 
if i was watching the test pattern that came on television 
at midnight. 

after  the  shock  wore  off  some,  i  tried  to  think 
what to do, how to get home. zach had taken the keys, 
or  i might've  tried driving  myself,  even though  i  didn't 
know gears from brakes. there wasn't a store open now 
to ask to use a phone, and when i spotted a pay phone 
down the street, i realized i didn't have a dime. i got out 
of the truck and walked. 

• • • 
when i got to the pink house a half hour later, i 
saw  august,  june,  rosaleen,  neil,  and  clayton  forrest 
gathered in the long shadows near the hydrangeas. the 

 

260 

murmur of their voices floated up into the dying light. i 
heard  zach's  name.  i  heard  mr.  forrest  say  the  word 
"jail."  i  guessed  that  zach  had  called  him  with  his  one 
phone call, and here he was, breaking the news. 

neil  stood  next  to  june,  which  told  me  they 
hadn't  really  meant  all  that  don't  you  come  back  and 
you  selfish  bitch  that  they'd  hurled  at  each  other.  i 
walked  toward  them,  unnoticed.  someone  down  the 
road was burning grass clippings. the whole sky smelled 
sour green, and stray pieces of ash flicked over my head. 
coming up behind them, i said, "august?" 

she pulled me to her. "thank goodness. here you 

are. i was about to come looking for you." 

i  told  them  what  had  happened  as  we  walked 
back  to  the  house.  august's  arm  was  around  my  waist 
like she was afraid i'd keel over again in a blind faint, but 
really,  i had  never been  more  present.  the blue  in  the 
shadows,  the  shape  of  them  against  the  house,  how 
they looked like  certain unkind animals—a  crocodile, a 
grizzly  bear—the  smell  of  alka-seltzer  circulating  over 
clayton  forrest's  head,  the  white  part  in  his  hair,  the 
weight  of  our  iring  strapped  around  our  ankles.  we 
could hardly walk for it. 

we  sat  in  the  ladder-back  chairs  around  the 
kitchen  table,  except  for rosaleen, who poured glasses 

 

261 

of tea and set a plate of pimiento-cheese sandwiches on 
the table, as if anybody could eat. 

rosaleen's hair was done up in perfect cornrow 
plaits,  which  i  guessed  may  had  done  for  her  after  
supper. 

"now, what about bail?" august said. 
clayton cleared his throat. "judge monroe is out 
of  town  on  vacation,  so  nobody  is  getting  out  before 
next wednesday, it looks like." 

neil  stood  up  and  walked  over  to  the  window. 
his hair was cut in a neat square at the back. i tried to 
concentrate  on  it  to  keep  from  breaking  down.  next 
wednesday was five days from now. five days. 

"well,  is  he  all  right?"  asked  june.  "he  wasn't 

hurt, was he?" 

"they  only  let  me  see  him  for  a  minute,"  said  

clayton. "but he seemed all right." 

outside, the night sky was moving over us. i was 
aware  of  it,  aware  of  the  way  clayton  had  said  he  
seemed  all  right,  as if we all understood he  wasn't  but 
would pretend otherwise. 

august  closed  her  eyes,  used  her  fingers  to 
smooth out the skin on her forehead. i saw a shiny film 
across  her  eyes  the  beginning  of  tears.  looking  at  her 
eyes, i could see a fire inside them. it was a hearth fire 
you  could  depend  on,  you  could  draw  up  to  and  get 

 

262 

warm  by  if  you  were  cold,  or  cook  something  on  that 
would feed the emptiness in you. i felt like we were all 
adrift  in  the  world,  and  all  we  had  was  the  wet  fire  in 
august's eyes. but it was enough. 

rosaleen  looked  at  me,  and  i  could  read  her 
thoughts.  just  because  you  broke  me  out  of  jail,  don't 
get  any  bright  ideas  about  zach.  i  understood  how 
people became career criminals. the first crime was the 
hardest. after that you're thinking, what's one more? a 
few more years in the slammer. big deal. 

"what  are  you  gonna  do  about  this?"  said 
rosaleen, standing beside clayton, looking down at him. 
her  breasts  sat  on  her  stomach,  and  her  fists  were 
planted in her hips. she looked like she wanted us all to 
fill our lips with snuff and go directly to the tiburon jail 
and spit on people's shoes. 

it  was  plain  rosaleen  had  fire  in  her,  too.  not 
hearth  fire,  like  august,  but  fire  that  burns  the  house 
down,  if  necessary,  to  clean  up  the  mess  inside  it. 
rosaleen reminded me of the statue of our lady in the 
parlor,  and  i  thought,  if  august  is  the  red  heart  on 
mary's chest, rosaleen is the fist. 

"i'll  do  my  best  to  get  him  out,"  said  clayton, 

"but i'm afraid he's got to stay in there a little while." 

i reached into my pocket and felt the black mary 
picture,  remembering  the  things  i'd  planned  to  say  to 

 

263 

august about my mother. but how could i do that now, 
with this terrible thing happening to zach? everything i 
wanted to say would have to wait, and i'd go back to the 
same suspended animation i'd been in before. 

"i don't see why may needs to know about this," 
june said. "it will do her in. you know how she loves that 
boy." 

every one of us turned to look at august. "you're 

right," she said. "it would be too much for may." 

"where is she?" i asked. 
"in  her  bed,  asleep,"  rosaleen  said.  "she  was 

worn out." 

i  remembered  i  had  seen  her  in  the  afternoon, 
out  by  the  wall,  pulling  a  load  of  stones  in  the  wagon.  
building onto her wall. as if she sensed a new addition 
was called for. 

• • • 
the jail in tiburon did not have curtains like the 
one  in  sylvan.  it  was  concrete-block  gray,  with  metal  
windows and poor lighting. i told myself it was an act of 
stupidity to go inside. i was a fugitive from justice, and 
here  i  was  breezing  into  a  jail  where  there  were 
probably policemen trained to recognize me. but august 
had  asked  if  i  wanted  to  come  with  her  to  visit  zach.  
how was i going to say anything but yes to that? 

 

264 

the  policeman  inside  had  a  crew  cut  and  was 
very tall, taller than neil, and neil was wilt chamberlain 
size. he didn't seem especially glad to see us. "are you 
his mother?" he asked august. 

i looked at his name tag. eddie hazelwurst. 
"i'm  his  godmother,"  august  said,  standing  very 
erect,  like  she  was  having  her  height  measured.  "and 
this is a friend of the family." 

his  eyes  passed  over  me.  the  only  thing  he  
seemed suspicious about was how a girl as white as me 
could  be  a  friend  of  the  family.  he  picked  up  a  brown 
clipboard from a desk and popped the fastener up and 
down while he tried to decide what to do with us. 

"all right, you can have five minutes," he said. 
he  opened  a  door  into  a  corridor  that  led  to  a  
single row of four jail cells, each of them holding a black 
boy.  the  smell  of  sweating  bodies  and  sour  urinals 
almost  overpowered  me.  i  wanted  to  bring  my  fingers 
up to pinch my nose, but i knew that would be the worst 
insult. they couldn't help that they smelled. they sat on 
benchlike cots hooked along the wall, staring at us as we 
passed. one boy was throwing a button against the wall, 
playing some kind of game. he stopped when we came 
by. 

 

265 

mr.  hazelwurst  led  us  to  the  last  cell.  "zach  
taylor,  you  got  visitors,"  he  said,  then  glanced  at  his 
watch. 

when  zach  stepped  toward  us,  i  wondered  if 
he'd  been  handcuffed,  fingerprinted,  photographed, 
pushed around. i wanted so much to reach through the 
bars and touch him, to press my fingers against his skin, 
because it seemed only by touch that i could be sure all 
this was actually happening. 

when  it  was  apparent  mr.  hazelwurst  wasn't 
leaving, august began to speak. she spoke about one of 
the hives she kept over on the haney farm, how it had 
up  and  swarmed.  "you  know  the  one,"  she  said.  "the 
one that had trouble with mites." she went into minute 
detail about the way she'd searched high and low, into 
the  dusk  hours,  combing  the  woods  out  past  the 
watermelon fields, finally finding the bees in a magnolia 
sapling,  the  whole  swarm  hanging  there  like  a  black 
balloon  caught  in  the  branches.  "i  used  the  funnel  to 
drop them in a swarm box," she said, "then i hived them 
again." 

i think she was trying to put it in zach's mind that 
she would never rest till he was back home with us. zach 
listened  with  his  eyes  watery  brown.  he  seemed 
relieved  to  keep  the  conversation  on  the  level  of  bee 
swarms. 

 

266 

i'd worked on lines i wanted to say to him, too, 
but in the moment i couldn't remember them. i stood by 
while  august asked him questions—how was he doing, 
what did he need? 

i watched  him,  filled  with  tenderness  and  ache, 
wondering  what  it  was  that  connected  us.  was  it  the 
wounded  places  down  inside  people  that  sought  each 
other out, that bred a kind of love between them? 

when mr. hazelwurst said, "time's up, let's go," 
zach cast his eyes in my direction. a vein stuck out right 
above his temple. i watched it quiver, the blood pulsing 
through it. i wanted to say something helpful, to tell him 
we  were  more  alike  than  he  knew,  but  it  seemed 
ridiculous  to  say  that.  i  wanted  to  reach  through  the 
bars and touch the vein with the blood rushing through 
it. but i didn't do that either. 

"are  you  writing  in  your  notebook?"  he  asked, 

his face and voice suddenly, oddly, desperate. 

i looked at him and nodded. in the next cell, the 
boy—jackson—made  a  noise,  a  kind  of  catcall,  that 
caused the moment to seem silly and cheap. zach shot 
him an angry look. 

"come  on,  you've  had  your  five  minutes,"  the 

policeman said. 

august placed her hand on my back, nudging me 

to leave. 

 

267 

zach  seemed  as  if  he  wanted  to  ask  me  

something. he opened his mouth, then closed it. 

"i'll write this all down for you," i said. "i'll put it 
in a story." i don't know if that's what he wanted to ask 
me, but  it's  something everybody  wants—for someone 
to  see  the  hurt  done  to  them  and  set  it  down  like  it  
matters. 

• • • 
we went around not bothering to smile, even in 
front of may. when she was in the room, we didn't talk 
about zach, but we didn't act like the world was fine and 
rosy  either.  june  resorted  to  her  cello,  the  way  she  
always did when sorrow came along. and walking to the 
honey house one morning, august stopped and stared at 
the tire ruts in the driveway left by zach's car. the way 
she stood there, i thought she might start to cry. 

everything  i  did  felt  heavy  and  difficult—drying 
the  dishes,  kneeling  for  evening  prayers,  even  pulling 
down the sheets to get into bed. 

on the second day of the month of august, after 
the supper dishes were washed up, and the hail marys 
had been done, august said, "no more moping tonight, 
we're going to watch ed sullivan." 

and that's what we were doing when the phone 
rang. to this day august and june wonder how our lives 
would have been different if one of them had answered 

 

268 

the  phone  instead  of  may.  i  remember  that  august 
made a move to answer it, but may was closest to the 
door. "i'll get it," she said. no one thought a thing about 
it. we fixed our eyes on the television, on mr. sullivan, 
who introduced a circus act involving monkeys that rode 
tiny scooters across a high wire. 

when  may  stepped  back  into  the  room  a  few  
minutes  later,  her  eyes  zigzagged  from  face  to  face. 
"that was zach's mother," she said. "why didn't you tell 
me about him getting put in jail?" 

she  looked  so  normal  standing  there.  for  a 
moment  none  of  us  moved.  we  watched  her  like  we 
were waiting for the roof to cave in. but may just stood 
there, calm as she could be. 

i  started  thinking  maybe  some  sort  of  miracle 

had taken place and she'd somehow gotten cured. 

"you  all  right?"  said  august,  easing  to  her  feet. 

may didn't answer. 

"may?" june said. 
i even smiled over at rosaleen and nodded, as if 

to say, can you believe how well she's taking this? 

august,  though,  turned  off  the  television  and 

studied may, frowning. 

may's head was angled to the side, and her eyes 
were  fixed  on  a  cross-stitched  picture  of  a  birdhouse 
that hung on the wall. it struck me all of a sudden that 

 

269 

her  eyes  weren't  actually  seeing  the  picture.  they  had 
glazed completely over. 

august went over to may. "answer me. are you 

all right?" 

in the silence i heard may's breathing grow loud 
and  a  little  ragged.  she  took  several  steps  backward, 
until she came to the wall. then she slid down onto the 
floor without making a sound. 

i'm not sure when it sank in that may had gone 
off  to  some  unreachable  place  inside  herself.  even 
august and june didn't realize it right away. they called 
her name like she'd only lost her hearing. 

rosaleen  bent  over  may  and  spoke  in  a  loud 
voice, trying to get through to her. "zach is gonna be all 
right. you don't need to worry any. mr. forrest is getting 
him out of jail on wednesday." 

may  stared  straight  ahead  like  rosaleen  wasn't 

even there. 

"what's  happened  to  her?"  june  asked,  and  i 
could hear a note of panic in her voice. "i've never seen 
her like this." 

may was here but not here. her hands lay limp in 
her  lap,  palms  up.  no  sobbing  into  her  dress  skirt.  no 
rocking back and forth. no pulling at her hair braids. she 
was so quiet, so different. 

 

270 

i  turned  my  face  to  the  ceiling,  i  just  couldn't 

watch. 

august went to the kitchen and came back with a 
dish towel filled with ice. she pulled may's head to her 
so it rested against her shoulder for a minute, and then 
she  lifted  her  sister's  face  and  pressed  the  towel  to 
may's  forehead  and  temples  and  along  her  neck.  she 
kept  on  doing  this  for  several  minutes,  then  put  the 
cloth down and tapped may's cheeks with her hands. 

may blinked a time or two and looked at august. 
she looked at all of us, huddled above her, as if she were 
returning from a long trip. 

"you feel better?" said august. 
may nodded. "i'll be okay." her words came out 

in an odd monotone. 

"well,  i'm  glad  to  see  you  can  talk,"  said  june.  

"come on, let's get you in the bathtub." 

august and june pulled may to her feet. 
"i'm going to the wall," may said. 
june shook her head. "it's getting dark." 
"just for a little while," may said. she moved into 
the  kitchen,  with  all  of  us  following  after  her.  she 
opened  a  cabinet  drawer,  took  out  a  flashlight,  her 
tablet, a stub of a pencil, and walked onto the porch. i 
pictured her writing it down—zach in jail—and pushing 
it into a crevice in the wall. 

 

271 

i  felt  somebody  should  personally  thank  every 
rock  out  there  for  the  human  misery  it  had  absorbed. 
we should kiss them one by one and say, we are sorry, 
but something strong and lasting had to do this for may, 
and  you  are  the  chosen  ones.  god  bless  your  rock 
hearts. 

"i'll go with you," said august. 
may  spoke  over  her  shoulder.  "no,  please, 

august, just me." 

august started to protest. "but—" 
"just  me,"  said  may,  turning  to  face  us.  "just 

me." 

we  watched  her  go  down  the  porch  steps  and 
move into the trees. in life there are things you can't get 
over no matter how hard you try, and that sight is one of 
them. may walking into the trees with the little circle of 
light bobbing in front of her, then swallowed up by the 
dark. 
 

 

 

272 

chapter ten 

a bee's life is but short. during spring and 
summer—the most strenuous periods of foraging—
a worker  bee,  as a  rule, does not  live  more than 
four  or  five  weeks…  threatened  by  all  kinds  of 
dangers during their foraging flights, many workers 
die before they have reached even that age.  

—the dancing bees 
 
i  sat  in  the  kitchen  with  august,  june,  and 
rosaleen while the night spread out around the house. 
may had been gone a whole five minutes when august 
got up and began to pace. she walked out to the porch 
and back and then stared out toward the wall. 

after twenty minutes she said, "that's it. let's go 

get her." 

she  got  the flashlight  from  the truck  and struck 
out for the wall, while june, rosaleen, and i hurried to 
keep pace. a night bird was singing from a tree branch, 

 

273 

just singing its heart out, urgent and feverish, like it was 
put there to sing the moon up to the top of the sky. 

"ma-a-a-a-y,"  called  august.  june  called,  too, 
then  rosaleen  and  me.  we  went  along  shouting  her 
name,  but  no  sound  came  back.  just  the  night  bird 
singing up the moon. 

after we walked from one end of the wailing wall 
to the other, we went back and walked it again, like this 
time  we  were  going  to  get  it  right.  walk  slower,  look 
closer,  call  louder.  this  time  may  would  be  there 
kneeling  with  the  flashlight  batteries  burned  out.  we 
would  think,  my  goodness,  how  did  we  miss  her  here 
the first time? that didn't happen, though, so we walked 
into the woods behind the wall, calling her name louder 
and louder till i could hear the hoarseness creeping into 
our throats, but not one of us would say, something is 
terribly wrong. 

despite the night, the heat had lingered  on bad 
as  ever,  and  i  could  smell  the  hot  dampness  of  our 
bodies as we combed the woods with a spot of light four 
inches across. 

finally  august  said,  "june,  you  go  to  the  house 
and call the police. tell them we need help to find our 
sister.  when  you  hang  up,  you  kneel  before  our  lady 
and  beg  her  to  watch  over  may,  then  you  come  back.  
we're going to walk toward the river." 

 

274 

june  took  off  running.  we  could  hear  her 
crashing  through  the  brush  as  we  turned  toward  the 
back  of  the  property  where  the  river  flowed.  august's 
legs moved faster and faster. rosaleen struggled to keep 
up, gulping for air. 

when  we  reached  the  river,  we  stood  there  a 
moment.  i'd  been  in  tiburon  long  enough  for  the  full 
moon  to  fade  away  and  grow  back  full  again.  it  hung 
over the river, sliding in and out of clouds. i stared at a 
tree  on  the  opposite  bank,  where  the  roots  were 
exposed  and  twisted,  and  felt  a  metallic-dry  taste  rise 
from the back of my throat and slide over my tongue. 

i reached for august's hand, but she had turned 
right  and  was  moving  along  the  bank,  calling  may's 
name. 

"ma-a-a-ay." 
rosaleen and i moved behind her in our clumsy 
knot,  so  close  we  must  have  seemed  to  the  night 
creatures  like  one  big  organism  with  six  legs.  i  was 
surprised  when  the  prayer  we  said  after  dinner  each 
night,  the  one  with  the  beads,  started  up  of  its  own 
accord and recited itself in the back reaches of my head. 
i could hear each word plainly. hail mary, full of grace, 
the  lord  is  with  thee.  blessed  art  thou  among  women, 
and blessed is  the fruit of thy  womb, jesus. holy mary, 

 

275 

mother of god, pray for us sinners, now and at the hour 
of our death. amen. 

it wasn't till august said, "good, lily, we should 
all pray," that i realized i'd been repeating it out loud. i 
couldn't tell if i was saying it as a prayer or muttering it 
as a way to push down the fear. 

august  said  the  words  with  me,  and  then 
rosaleen  did,  too.  we  walked  along  the  river  with  the 
words streaming behind us like ribbons in the night. 

when june came back, she was holding another 
flashlight  she'd  dug  up  somewhere  at  the  house.  the 
puddle of light wobbled as she came through the woods. 
"over here," called august, aiming her flashlight 
up through the trees. we waited  for june to  reach the 
riverbank. 

"the police are on their way," she said. 
the  police  are  coming.  i  looked  at  rosaleen,  at  
the ends of  her mouth turned down.  the police hadn't 
recognized me  the day  i'd visited the  jail; i  hoped  they 
didn't get lucky with rosaleen. 

june  shouted  may's  name  and  plowed  up  the 
riverbank  into  the  dark,  followed  by  rosaleen,  but 
august  moved  slowly  now,  carefully.  i  stayed  close 
behind  her,  saying  hail  marys  to  myself,  faster  and 
faster. 

 

276 

suddenly  august  stopped 

i 
stopped,  too.  and  i  didn't  hear  the  night  bird  singing 
anymore. 

in  her  tracks. 

i watched august, not taking my eyes off her. she 
stood  tense  and  alert,  staring  down  at  the  bank.  at 
something  i  could  not  see.  "june,"  she  called  in  a 
strange,  whispery  voice,  but  june  and  rosaleen  had 
pushed farther up the riverbank and didn't hear. 

only i heard. 
the  air  felt  thick  and  charged,  too  thick  to  
breathe. i stepped over beside august, letting my elbow 
touch  her  arm,  needing  the  weight  of  her  next  to  me; 
and  there  was  may's  flashlight,  shut  off  and  sitting  on 
the wet ground. 

it  seems  odd  to  me  now  how  we  went  on 
standing there another minute, me waiting for august to 
say something, but she didn't speak, just stood, soaking 
up  that  last  moment.  a  wind  rose  up,  raking  its  sound 
along  the  tree  branches,  hitting  our  faces  like  an  oven 
blast,  like the sudden breezes of hell. august looked at 
me, then moved her flashlight beam out to the water. 

the  light  swept  across  the  surface,  making  a 
spatter of inkgold splotches before it stopped, abruptly. 
may lay in the river, just beneath the surface. her eyes 
were  wide  open  and  unblinking,  and  the  skirt  of  her 
dress fanned out and swayed in the current. 

 

277 

i  heard  a  noise  come  from  august's  lips,  a  soft 
moan.  i  clutched  frantically  at  august's  arm,  but  she 
pulled free of me, threw down her flashlight, and waded 
into the river. 

i splashed in after her. water surged around my 
legs,  causing  me  to  fall  once  on  the  slippery  bottom.  i  
grabbed  for  august's  skirt,  just  missing.  i  came  up 
sputtering. 

when i reached her, august was staring down at 

her baby sister. "june," she shouted. "june!" 

may  lay  in  two  feet  of  water  with  a  huge  river  
stone on top of her chest. it weighted her body, holding 
it on the bottom. looking at her, i thought, she will get 
up  now.  august  will  roll  away  the  stone,  and  may  will  
come up for air, and we will go back to the house andget 
her  dry.  i wanted  to reach  down  and  touch  her,  shake 
her shoulder a little. she couldn't have died out here in 
the river. that would be impossible. 

the  only  parts  of  her  not  submerged  were  her 
hands.  they  floated,  her  palms 
little  ragged  cups 
bobbing on the surface, the water weaving in and out of 
her fingers.  even now  that's the  picture  that will  wake 
me up in the night, not may's eyes, open and staring, or 
the  stone  resting  on  her  like  a  grave  slab.  her  hands.  
june came thrashing into the water. when she reached 
may,  she  stood  beside  august,  panting,  her  arms 

 

278 

dangling beside her body. "oh, may," she whispered and 
looked away, squeezing her eyes closed. 

glancing  toward  the  bank, 

i  saw  rosaleen 
standing  ankle  deep  in  the  river,  her  whole  body 
shaking. 

august knelt down in the water and shoved the 
stone off  may's chest.  grabbing may  by the  shoulders, 
she  pulled  her  up.  her  body  made  an  awful  sucking 
sound as it broke the surface. her head rolled back, and i 
saw  that  her  mouth  was  partially  open  and  her  teeth 
were  rimmed  with  mud.  river  reeds  clung  to  her  hair 
braids.  i  looked  away.  i  knew  then.  may  was  dead.  
august  knew,  too,  but  she  put  her  ear  to  may's  chest, 
listening.  after  a  minute,  though,  she  drew  back  and 
pulled may's  head to her  breast, and it almost seemed 
like she wanted may to listen now for her heart. 

"we've lost her," august said. 
i  started  to  shiver.  i  could  hear  my  teeth  in  my  
mouth,  crashing  against  each  other.  august  and  june 
scooped their  arms under may's body and struggled to 
carry  her  to  the  bank.  she  was  saturated,  bulging.  i 
grabbed her ankles and tried to steady them. the river, 
it seemed, had carried away her shoes. 

when  they  laid  her  down  on  the  bank,  water 
gushed  from  her  mouth  and  nostrils.  i  thought,  this  is 
the  way  our  lady  came  washing  up  on  the  river  near 

 

279 

charleston.  i  thought,  look  at  her  fingers,  her  hands. 
they are so precious. 

i imagined how may had rolled the rock from the 
bank out into the river, then lay down, pulling it on top 
of her. she had held it tight, like a baby, and waited for 
her lungs to fill. i wondered if she had flailed and jerked 
toward  the  surface  at  the  last  second,  or  did  she  go 
without  fighting,  embracing  the rock, letting  it  soak up 
all  the  pain  she  felt?  i  wondered  about  the  creatures 
that had swum by while she died. 

june and august, sopping wet, stooped on either 
side of  her, while mosquitoes  sang in  our ears and the 
river  went  on  about  its  business,  coiling  off  into  the 
darkness. 
last 
moments,  too,  but  i  did  not  see  horror  on  their  faces 
now, just a heartbroken acceptance. this had been the 
thing  they'd  been  waiting  for  half  their  lives  without 
even realizing it. 

i  was  sure  they'd  pictured  may's 

august tried to close may's eyes with her fingers, 
but they would only stay half shut. "it's just like april," 
june said. 

"hold the flashlight on may for me," august said 
to  her.  the  words  came  out  quiet  and  steady.  i  could 
barely hear them over the bamming of my heart. 

 

280 

by  the  small  beam  of  light,  august  plucked  out 
the tiny green leaves stuck in the plaits in may's hair and 
tucked each one into her pocket. 

august and june scraped off every piece of river 
debris  there  was  from  may's  skin  and  clothes,  and 
rosaleen,  poor  rosaleen,  who  i  realized  had  lost  her 
new best friend, stood, not making a sound, but with her 
chin shaking  so  awful i wanted  to reach up and  hold  it 
for her. 

then a sound i will never forget whooshed out of 
may's  mouth—a  long, bubbling  sigh,  and we all  looked 
at each other, confused, with a second of actual hope, as 
if the miracle of miracles was about to take place after 
all,  but  it  was  only  a  pocket  of  swallowed  air  that  had  
suddenly  been  released.  it  swept  across  my  face, 
smelling like the river, like a piece of old wood that had 
gone moldy. 

i looked down  at may's  face and felt a  wave of 
nausea.  stumbling  off  into  the  trees,  i  bent  over  and 
vomited. 

afterward, as i wiped my mouth on the hem of 
my shirt, i heard a sound break through the darkness, a 
cry  so  piercing  it  made  the  bottom  of  my  heart  drop.  
looking back, i saw august framed in the light of june's 
flashlight,  the  sound  coming  from  deep  in  her  throat. 

 

281 

when  it  faded  away,  she  dropped  her  head  straight 
down onto may's soggy chest. 

i reached for the limb of a small cedar and held 
tight, as though everything i had was about to slip from 
my hands. 

• • • 
"so you're an orphan?" the policeman said. 
it was that tall, crewcut eddie hazelwurst who'd 

escorted august and me in to see zach in jail. 

rosaleen  and  i  sat  in  the  rocking  chairs  in  the 
parlor,  while  he  stood  before  us  holding  a  small 
notebook,  ready  to  capture  every  word.  the  other 
policeman  was  outside  searching  around  the  wailing 
wall, for what i couldn't imagine. 

my chair rocked so fast i was in danger of being 
it.  rosaleen's,  however,  remained 

pitched  out  of 
motionless—her face closed down. 

when we'd first gotten back to the house after 
finding may,  august had met both policemen and then 
sent me and rosaleen upstairs. "go on up there and get 
dried off," she'd said to me. i'd peeled off my shoes and 
rubbed  myself  with  a  towel  while  we  stood  at  the 
upstairs  window.  we'd  watched  the  men  from  the 
ambulance  bring  may  back  from  the  woods  on  a 
stretcher,  then  listened  as  the  two  policemen  asked 
august and june all sorts of questions. their voices had 

 

282 

floated  up  the  stairwell.  yes,  she's  been  depressed 
lately.  well,  actually,  she  was  depressed  on  and  off  all  
the  time.  she  had  a  condition.  she  couldn't  seem  to 
distinguish  other  people's  suffering  from  her  own.  no, 
we  didn't  find  a  note.  an  autopsy?  all  right,  we 
understand. 

mr. hazelwurst had wanted to talk to everyone, 
so  here  we  were.  i'd  told  him  exactly  what  happened 
from  the  time  may  answered  the  telephone  to  the 
moment we found her in the river. 

then  he  started  with  the  personal  questions. 
wasn't i that girl who came to the jail last week to see 
one of the colored boys? 

what  was  i  doing  staying  here?  who  was  

rosaleen? 

i  explained  everything  about  my  mother  dying 
when i was small, my father going to his maker earlier 
this  summer  after  a  tractor  accident,  which  was  the 
story i was sticking with. rosaleen, i said, was my nanny. 
"i guess you could say i'm an orphan," i told him. 
"but i've got family in virginia. it was my father's dying 
wish  for  me  to  go  live  with  my  aunt  bernie.  she's  
expecting me and rosaleen both. 

she'll  be  sending  us  bus  fare  or  driving  down 
here and picking us up herself. she keeps saying, "lily, i 
can't wait for you to get here." 
283 

 

i  tell  her,  "just  so  we're  there  before  school 

starts." i'll be a sophomore, which i cannot believe." 

he narrowed his eyes like he was trying to follow 
all this. i was breaking every rule of successful lying. do 
not  talk  so  much,  i  told  myself,  but  i  couldn't  seem  to  
stop. 

"i  am  so  happy  about  going  to  live  with  her  up  
there. she is real nice. you wouldn't believe all the stuff 
she  has  sent  me  over  the  years.  especially  costume  
jewelry and teddy bears. one bear after another." 

i was only glad august and june were not present 
to hear this. they had left to follow the ambulance in the 
honey wagon, wanting to see may's body delivered safe 
and sound to wherever it was going. it was bad enough 
rosaleen was in the room. i was afraid she was going to 
give us away, say something like actually we came here 
right  after  lily  broke  me  out  of  jail.  but  she  sat  drawn  
into herself, a complete mute. 

"now, what was your last name again?" he said. 
"williams,"  i  said.  i  had  told  him  this  twice 
already,  so  i  had  to  wonder  what  kind  of  educational 
requirements  they  had  for  policemen  in  tiburon.  it 
looked like the same ones as sylvan. 

he  drew  up  even  taller.  "well,  what  i  don't 
understand  is,  if  you're  going  to  live  with  your  aunt  in 
virginia, what are you doing here?" 

 

284 

here is the translation: i am completely confused 
what  a  white  girl  like  you  is  doing  staying  in  a  colored  
house. 

i took a breath. "well, see, my aunt bernie had to 
have  an  operation.  it  was  female  trouble.  so  rosaleen 
over  there  said,  "why  don't  me  and  you  stay  with  my  
friend august boatwright in tiburon till aunt bernie gets 
on her feet again?"' it was no sense in us going up there 
while she was in the hospital." 

he  was  actually  writing  this  down.  why?  i 
wanted to yell at him, this is not about me and rosaleen 
and  aunt  bernie's  operation.  this  is  about  may.  she  is 
dead,  or  haven't  you  noticed?  i  should've  been  in  my 
room right then crying my eyeballs out, and here i was 
having the stupidest conversation of my life. 

"didn't  you  have  any  white  people  back  in 

spartanburg you could stay with?" 

translation:  anything  would  be  better  than  you 

staying in a colored house. 

"no,  sir,  not  really.  i  didn't  have  that  many  
friends. for some reason i didn't fit in that well with the 
crowd.  i  think  it  was  cause  i  made  such  good  grades.  
one lady at church said i could stay there till aunt bernie 
got  well,  but  then  she  got  shingles,  and  there  went 
that." 

lord god, somebody stop me. 

285 

 

he  looked  at  rosaleen.  "so  how  did  you  know 
august?" i held my breath, aware that my rocking chair 
had come to a standstill. 

"she's my husband's first cousin," rosaleen said. 
"me and her kept up after my husband left me. august 
was the only one of his family who knew what a sorry 
jackass he was." she cut her eyes at me as if to say, see? 
you aren't the only one who can concoct lies at the drop 
of a hat. 

he  flipped  his  notebook  shut  and,  crooking  his 
finger  at  me,  motioned  me  to  follow  him  to  the  door. 
after he stepped outside, he said, "take my advice and 
call your aunt and tell her to come on and get you, even 
if  she  isn't  a  hundred  percent  well.  these  are  colored 
people here. you understand what i'm saying?" 

i wrinkled up  my forehead. "no, sir,  i'm afraid i 
it's  not  natural,  that  you 

don't."  "i'm  just  saying 
shouldn't be… well, lowering yourself." 

"oh." 
"i'm gonna come back soon, and i better not find 
you  still  here.  okay?"  he  smiled  and  put  his  gigantic 
hand on my head like we were two white people with a 
secret understanding. 

"okay." 
i closed the door behind him. whatever glue had 
kept  me  together  throughout  all  that  cracked  then.  i 

 

286 

walked  back  into  the  parlor,  already  starting  to  sob. 
rosaleen  put  her  arm  around  me,  and  i  saw  tears  
coming down her face, too. 

we  walked  up  the  stairs  to  the  room  she'd  
shared  with  may.  rosaleen  pulled down the  sheets  on 
her bed. 

"go on, get in," she told me. 
"but where will you sleep?" 
"right over here," she answered, pulling back the 
covers  on  may's  bed,  the  pink-and-brown  afghan  may 
had crocheted with  popcorn stitches. rosaleen climbed 
in and pushed her face into the creases of the pillow. i 
knew she was smelling for may's scent. 

• • • 
you'd  think  i  would  have  dreamed  about  may, 
but  when  i  fell  asleep,  it  was  zach  who  came.  i  can't  
even tell you what was happening in the dream. i woke 
up,  my  breath  panting  a  little,  and  i  knew  it  had  been 
about him. he seemed close and real, like i could sit up 
and 
i 
remembered  where  he  was,  and  an  unbearable 
heaviness came over me. 

to  his  cheek.  then 

touch  my 

fingertips 

i pictured his cot with his shoes sitting under it, 
how  he  was  probably  lying  awake  this  very  moment 
watching the ceiling, listening to the other boys breathe. 

 

287 

across the room a rustling noise startled me, and 
i  had  one  of  those  strange  moments  where  you  don't 
know quite where you are. only half awake, i'd thought i 
was in the honey house, but it came to me now that the 
sound was rosaleen turning over in bed. and then, then 
i remembered may. i remembered her in the river. 

i  had  to  get  up,  slip  into  the  bathroom,  and  
throw water on my face. i was standing there with the 
night-light  casting  its  small  brightness  when  i  looked 
down  and  saw  the  claw-footed  tub  wearing  the  red 
socks may had put on its porcelain feet. i smiled then; i 
couldn't help it. it was the side of may i never wanted to 
forget. i closed my eyes, and all the best pictures of her 
came to me. i saw her corkscrew braids glistening in the 
sprinkler,  her  fingers  arranging  the  graham-cracker 
crumbs,  working  so  hard  on  behalf  of  a  single  roach's 
life. and that hat she wore the day she danced the conga 
line with the daughters of mary. mostly, though, i saw 
the  blaze  of  love  and  anguish  that  had  come  so  often 
into her face. 

in the end it had burned her up. 
• • • 
after  the  autopsy,  after  the  police  made  her 
suicide official, after the funeral home had fixed may up 
as  pretty  as  they  could,  she  came  home  to  the  pink  
house. first thing wednesday morning, august 5, a black 

 

288 

hearse pulled up in the driveway, and four men in dark 
suits lifted out may's casket and brought it right into the 
parlor.  when  i  asked  august  why  may  was  coming 
through  the  front  door  in  her  coffin,  she  said,  "we're 
going to sit with her till she's buried." 

i hadn't expected this, as all the people i knew in 
sylvan  had  their  dead  loved  ones  go  straight  from  the 
funeral home to the graveyard. 

august said, "we sit with her so we can tell her 
good-bye.  it's  called  a  vigil.  sometimes  people  have  a 
hard time letting death sink in, they can't say good-bye. 
a vigil helps us do that." 

if  the  dead  person  is  right  there  in  your  living 
room,  it  would  certainly  make  things  sink  in  better.  it 
was strange to think about a dead person in the house, 
but  if  it  helped  us  say  good-bye  better,  then  okay,  i 
could see the point of it. 

"it helps may, too," august said. 
"helps may?" 
"you know we all have a spirit, lily, and when we 
die, it goes  back to god, but nobody really knows how 
long  that  takes.  maybe  it  takes  a  split  second,  and  
maybe it takes a week or two. anyway, when we sit with 
may, we're saying, 'it's okay, may, we know this is your 
home, but you can go now. it'll be all right.'" 

 

289 

august had them roll the coffin, which sat on its 
own  table  with  wheels,  in  front  of  our  lady  of  chains 
and then open it up. after the funeral home men drove 
away, august and rosaleen walked up to the coffin and 
stared down at may, but i hung back. 

i  was  walking  around,  inspecting  myself  in  the 
various  mirrors,  when  june  came  down  with  her  cello 
and  began  to  play.  she  played  "oh!  susanna,"  which 
made all of us smile. there is nothing like a small joke at 
a  vigil  to  help  you  relax.  i  walked  up  to  the  coffin  and  
stood between august and rosaleen. 

it  was  the  same  old  may,  except  her  skin  was  
pulled tight across her face bones. the lamplight spilling 
into  the  coffin  gave  her  a  kind  of  glow.  they  had  her  
wearing a royal blue dress i had never seen, with pearl 
buttons  and  a  boat-neck  collar,  and  her  blue  hat.  she 
looked like any second she would pop open her eyes and 
grin at us. 

this  was  the  woman  who'd  taught  my  mother 
everything  there  was  to  know  about  getting  rid  of 
roaches in a nice way. i counted on my fingers the days 
since  may  had  told  me about  my  mother  staying here. 
six. it seemed like six months. i still wanted so badly to 
tell august what i knew. i guess i could've told rosaleen, 
but  it  was  really  august  i  wanted  to  tell.  she  was  the  
only one who knew what any of it meant. 

 

290 

standing at the coffin, looking up at august, i had 
a powerful  urge  to tell  her  right  then.  just  blurt  it out. 
i'm  not  lily  williams,  i'm  lily  owens,  and  it  was  my  
mother  who  stayed  here.  may  told  me.  and  then  it  
would  all  come  out.  whatever  terrible  things  might 
happen,  would.  when  i  peered  up  at  her,  though,  she 
was  brushing  tears  off  her 
for  a 
handkerchief  in  her  pocket,  and  i  knew  it  would  be 
selfish to pour this into her cup when it was already to 
the brim with grief for may. 

looking 

face, 

june  played  with  her  eyes  closed,  as  if  may's 
spirit  getting  into  heaven  depended  solely  on  her.  you 
have  never  heard  such  music,  how  it  made  us  believe 
death was nothing but a doorway. august and rosaleen 
finally sat down, but once i was up at the coffin, i found i 
couldn't leave. may's arms were crossed over her chest, 
wings  folded  in  on  themselves,  a  pose  i  did  not  find 
flattering. i reached in and held her hand. it was waxy-
cool,  but  i  didn't  care.  i  hope  you  will  be  happier  in 
heaven, i told her. i hope you will not need any kind of 
wall up there. and if you see mary, our lady, tell her we 
know jesus is the main one down here, but we're doing 
our best to keep her memory going. for some reason i 
felt exactly like may's spirit was hovering in a corner of 
the  ceiling  hearing  every  word,  even  though  i  wasn't 
speaking out loud. 

 

291 

and i wish you would look up my mother, i said. 
tell her you saw me, that i'm at least away from t. ray 
for the time being. say this to her: "lily would appreciate 
a sign letting her know that you love her. it doesn't have 
to be anything big, but please send something." 

i  let  out  a  long  breath,  still  holding  her  dead 
hand,  thinking  how  big  her  fingers  felt  in  mine.  so  i 
guess  this  is  good-bye,  i  told  her.  a  shudder  went 
through me, a burning along my eyelashes. 

tears  fell  off  my  cheeks  and  spotted  her  dress.  
before  i  left  her,  though,  i  rearranged  her  a  little.  i  
folded  her  hands  together  and  tucked  them  under  her 
chin like she was thinking seriously about the future. 

• • • 
at  ten  o'clock  that  morning,  while  june  was  
playing  more  songs  for  may,  and  rosaleen  was  poking 
around in the kitchen, i sat on the back-porch steps with 
my notebook, trying to write everything down, but really 
i  was  watching  for  august.  she  had  gone  out  to  the 
wailing  wall.  i pictured her  out  there working  her pain 
into the spaces around the stones. 

by  the  time  i  spotted  her  coming  back,  i'd 
stopped  writing  and  was  doodling  in  the  margins.  she 
paused  halfway  across  the yard  and stared  toward the 
driveway, shielding her eyes from the sun. 

 

292 

"look  who's  here!"  she  yelled,  breaking  into  a 

run. 

i had never seen august run before, and i could 
not believe how quickly she crossed the grass with her 
loping  strides,  her  long  legs  stretched  out  under  her 
skirt. "it's zach!" she shouted at me, and i dropped my 
notebook and flew down the steps. 

i  heard  rosaleen  behind  me  in  the  kitchen 
shouting to june that zach was here, heard june's music 
stop in the middle of a note. when i got to the driveway, 
he  was  climbing  out  of  clayton's  car.  august  wrapped 
him  up  in  her  arms.  clayton  stared  at  the  ground  and 
smiled. 

when august turned zach loose, i saw how much 
skinnier  he  looked.  he  stood  there  watching  me.  i  
couldn't read the expression on his face. i walked up to 
him,  wishing  i  knew  the  right  thing  to  say.  a  breeze 
tossed a piece of my hair across my face, and he reached 
out and brushed it away. then he pulled me hard against 
his chest and held me for a few moments. 

"are  you  all  right?"  june  said,  rushing  up  and 
cupping his jaw in her hand. "we've been worried sick." 
"i'm  fine  now,"  zach  said.  but  something  i 
couldn't put my finger on had evaporated from his face. 
clayton  said,  "the  girl  who  sells  tickets  at  the 
theater—well,  apparently  she  saw  the  whole  thing.  it 

 

293 

took  her  long  enough,  but  she  finally  told  the  police 
which one of the boys threw the bottle. so they dropped 
the charges against zach." 

"oh, thank god,"  said  august, and every one of 

us seemed to breathe out all at once. 

"we just wanted to come by and say how sorry 
we are about may," clayton said. he embraced august, 
then june. when he turned to me, he placed his hands 
on my shoulders, not an embrace, but close. "lily, how 
nice to see you again," he said, then looked at rosaleen, 
who was hanging back by the car. "you, too, rosaleen." 

august  took  rosaleen's  hand  and  pulled  her 
over, then went on holding it, the way she used to hold 
may's  sometimes,  and  it  struck  me  that  she  loved  
rosaleen.  that  she  would  like  to  change  rosaleen's 
name to july and bring her into their sisterhood. 

"i  couldn't  believe  it  when  mr.  forrest  told  me  

about may," said zach. 

walking back  to  the  house  so  clayton and zach 
could take their turns beside the casket, i was thinking, i 
wish i'd rolled my hair. i wish i'd done it in one of those 
new, beehive hairdos. 

we all gathered around may. clayton bowed his 

head, but zach stared into her face. 

we stood there and stood there. rosaleen made 
a little humming sound, i think out of awkwardness, but 

 

294 

eventually  she  stopped.  i looked over  at zach,  and  the 
tears were pouring down his cheeks. 

"i'm  sorry,"  he  said.  "it  was  all  my  fault.  if  i'd  
turned in the one who threw the bottle, i wouldn't have 
gotten arrested and none of this would've happened." 

i had thought maybe he would never find out it 
was his arrest that sent may to the river. but that had 
been too much to hope for. 

"who told you?" i said. 
he  waved  his  hand  like  it  didn't  matter.  "my  
mother  heard  it  from  otis.  she  didn't  want  to  tell  me,  
but  she  knew  i'd  hear  it  from  somewhere,  sooner  or 
later." he wiped his face. "i just wish i'd—" 

august  reached  over  and  touched  zach's  arm. 
she said, "well, now, i guess i could say if i'd told may 
from  the beginning about you getting arrested, instead 
of keeping it from her, none of this would've happened. 
or  if  i'd  stopped  may  from  going  out  to  the  wall  that  
night, none of this would've happened. what if i hadn't 
waited so long before going out there and getting her—" 
she looked down at may's body. "it was may who did it, 
zach." 

i was afraid, though, the blame would find a way 

to stick to them. that's how blame was. 

• • • 

 

295 

"i  could  use  your  help  right  now  to  drape  the 
hives," august said to zach as they started to leave. "you 
remember like we did when esther died?" looking over 
at  me,  she  said,  "esther  was  a  daughter  of  mary  who 
died last year." 

"sure, i can stay and help," said zach. 
"you wanna come, lily?" august asked. 
"yes,  ma'am."  draping the  hives—i  had  no  idea 
what  that  was,  but  you  couldn't  have  paid  me  fifty 
dollars  to  miss  it.  after  clayton  said  good-bye,  we 
fastened on our hats and veils and went out to the hives, 
bearing  armloads  of  black  crepe  material  cut  in  giant 
squares. august showed us how to drape a square over 
each hive box, securing it with a brick and making sure 
we left the bees' entrance door open. 

i  watched  how  august  stood  a  moment  before 
each  hive  with  her  fingers  knitted  together  under  her 
chin.  exactly  what  are  we  doing  this  for?  i  wanted  to  
know,  but  it  seemed  like  a  holy  ritual  i  shouldn't 
interrupt. 

when  we  had  all  the  hives  covered,  we  stood  
under  the  pines  and  gazed  at  them,  this  little  town  of  
black buildings.  a  city of  mourning. even the  humming 
turned gloomy under the black drapes, low and long like 
foghorns must sound going across the sea at night. 

 

296 

august pulled off her hat and walked to the lawn 
chairs in the backyard with me and zach tagging behind 
her. we sat with the sun behind us, staring out toward 
the wailing wall. 

"a  long  time  ago  beekeepers  always  covered 
their  hives  when  someone  in  their  family  died,"  said 
august. 

"how come?" i asked. 
"covering  the  hives  was  supposed  to  keep  the 
bees from  leaving.  you see,  the last  thing  they wanted 
was their bees swarming off when a death took place. 
having  bees  around  was  supposed  to  ensure  that  the 
dead person would live again." 

my eyes grew wide. "really?" 
"tell her about aristaeus," zach said. 
"oh,  yes,  aristaeus.  every  beekeeper  should 

know that story." 

she smiled at me in a way that made me feel i 
was about to get part two of the beekeeper's induction, 
part one being the sting. 

"aristaeus was the first keeper of bees. one day 
all his bees died, punishment by the gods for something 
bad  that  aristaeus  had  done.  the  gods  told  him  to 
sacrifice a bull to show he was sorry, and then return to 
the  carcass  in  nine  days  and  look  inside  it.  well, 
aristaeus  did  just  what  they  said,  and  when  he  came 

 

297 

back, he saw a swarm of bees fly out of the dead bull. 
his own bees, reborn. he took them home to his hives, 
and after that people believed that bees had power over 
death.  the  kings  in  greece  made  their  tombs  in  the 
shape of beehives for that very reason." 

zach sat with his elbows on his knees staring at 
the circle of grass, still fat and emerald green from our 
dance in the sprinkler. 

"when a bee flies, a soul will rise," he said. 
i gave him a blank look. 
"it's  an  old  saying,"  august  said.  "it  means  a  
person's soul will be reborn into the next life if bees are 
around." 

"is that in the bible?" i said. 
august 

laughed.  "no,  but  back  when  the 
christians hid from the romans down in the catacombs, 
they  used  to  scratch  pictures  of  bees  on  the  walls.  to 
remind  each  other  that  when  they  died  they'd  be 
resurrected." 

i shoved  my hands under  my thighs  and sat up, 
trying  to  picture  catacombs,  whatever  they  were.  "do 
you  think  putting  black  cloths  over  the  hives  will  help 
may get to heaven?" i asked. 

"goodness no," august said. "putting black cloths 
on the hives is for us. i do it to remind us that life gives 

 

298 

way into death, and then death turns around and gives 
way into life." 

i leaned back in my chair, gazing at the sky, how 
endless  it  was,  the  way  it  fit  down  over  the  world  like 
the lid of a hive. i wished more than anything we could 
bury  may  in  a  beehive  tomb.  that  i  could,  myself,  lie  
down in one and be reborn. 

• • • 
when  the  daughters  of  mary  showed  up,  they 
were  loaded  down  with  food.  the  last  time  i'd  seen 
them,  queenie  and  her  daughter,  violet,  had  on  the 
smallest hats in the group, and this time they'd left them 
off completely. i think it was because queenie hated to 
cover the whiteness of her hair, which she was proud to 
have, and violet, who had to be forty at least, couldn't 
bring herself to wear a hat if her mother wasn't wearing 
one.  if  queenie  went  into  the  kitchen  and  stuck  her 
head in the oven, violet would go stick hers in, too. 

lunelle,  mabelee,  cressie,  and  sugar-girl  each 
wore  a  black  hat,  not  as  spectacular  as  the  previous 
ones, except for lunelle's, which had both a red veil and 
a red feather. they took off the hats and lined them up 
on  the  piano  as  soon  as  they  came  in,  so  that  you  
wanted to say, what's the use? 

they got under way slicing ham, laying out fried 
chicken,  shaking  paprika  on  the  deviled  eggs.  we  had 

 

299 

green  beans,  turnips,  macaroni  and  cheese,  caramel 
cake—all kinds of funeral foods. we ate standing in the 
kitchen  holding  paper  plates,  saying  how  much  may 
would have liked everything. 

when we were so full that what we needed was 
a  nap,  we  went  to  the  parlor  and  sat  with  may.  the  
daughters  passed  around  a  wooden  bowl  full  of 
something  they  called  manna.  a  salted  mixture  of 
sunflower,  sesame,  pumpkin,  and  pomegranate  seeds 
drizzled with honey and baked to perfection. they ate it 
by  the  handfuls,  saying  they  wouldn't  dream  of  sitting 
with  the  dead  without  eating  seeds.  seeds  kept  the 
living from despair, they explained. 

mabelee  said,  "she  looks  so  good—doesn't  she 

look good?" 

queenie snorted. "if she looks that good, maybe 
we ought to put her on display in the drive-by window at 
the funeral home." 

"oh, queenie!" cried mabelee. 
cressie noticed rosaleen and me sitting there in 
the  dark  and  said,  "the  funeral  home  in  town  has  a 
drive-by window. it used to be a bank." 

"nowadays they put the open casket right up in 
the window where we used to drive through and get our 
checks cashed," said queenie. "people can drive through 
and  pay  their  respects  without having  to get  out.  they 

 

300 

even send the guest book out in the drawer for you to 
sign." 

"you ain't serious," said rosaleen. 
"oh, yeah," queenie said. "we're serious." 
they might've been speaking the truth, but they 
didn't  look  serious.  they  were  falling  on  each  other 
laughing, and there was may, dead. 

lunelle  said,  "i  drove  in  there  one  time  to  see  
mrs. lamar after she passed, since i used to work for her 
way  back  when.  the  woman  who  sat  in  the  window 
beside her casket used to be the bank teller there, and 
when i drove off, she said, 'you have a nice day now.'" 

i  turned  to  august,  who  was  wiping  her  eyes 
from  tears  of  hilarity.  i  said,  "you  won't  let  them  put  
may in the bank window, will you?" 

"honey,  don't  worry  about  it,"  said  sugar-girl. 
"the  drive-by  window  is  at  the  white  people's  funeral 
home. they're the only ones with enough money to fix 
up something that ridiculous." 

they  all  broke  down  again  with  hysterics,  and  i  
could  not  help  laughing,  too,  partly  with  relief  that 
people would not be joyriding through the funeral home 
to  see  may  and  partly  because  you  could  not  help 
laughing at the sight of all the daughters laughing. 

but i will tell you this secret thing, which not one 
of  them  saw,  not  even  august,  the  thing  that  brought 

 

301 

me the most cause for gladness. it was how sugar-girl 
said what she did, like i was truly one of them. not one 
person in the room said, sugar-girl, really, talking about 
white  people  like  that  and  we  have  a  white  person 
present. they didn't even think of me being different. 

up until then i'd thought that white people and 
colored people getting along was the big aim, but after 
that i decided everybody being colorless together was a 
better  plan. 
i  thought  of  that  policeman,  eddie 
hazelwurst, saying i'd lowered myself to be in this house 
of colored women, and for the very life of me i couldn't 
understand how it had turned out this way, how colored 
women had become the lowest ones on the totem pole. 
you  only  had  to  look  at  them  to  see  how  special  they  
were,  like  hidden  royalty  among  us.  eddie  hazelwurst. 
what a shitbucket. 

i  felt  so  warm  inside  toward  them  i  thought  to 
myself  that  if  i  should  die,  i  would  be  glad  to  go  on  
display  in  the  bank  window  and  give  the  daughters  of 
mary a good laugh. 

• • • 
on the second morning of the vigil, long before 
june  came 
the  daughters  arrived,  even  before 
downstairs,  august  found  may's  suicide  note  caught 
beneath the roots of a live oak, not ten yards from the 

 

302 

spot  she'd  died.  the  woods  had  buried  it  under  fresh 
sprouted leaves, the kind that shoot up overnight. 

rosaleen was making banana cream pie in honor 
of  may,  and  i  was  sitting  at  the  table  working  on  my 
cereal  and  trying  to  find  something  decent  on  the 
transistor  radio  when  august  burst  into  the  kitchen 
holding the  note  with  two  hands,  like  the words might 
fall off if she wasn't real careful. 

she yelled up the stairs, "june, come down here. 

i found a note from may." 

august spread it out on the table and stood over 
it  with  her  hands  pressed  together.  i  turned  off  the 
plastic  radio  and  stared  at  the  crinkle-stiff  paper,  how 
the words were faded from being outside. 

june's bare feet slapped the stairs, and she broke 

into the room. "oh, god, august. what does it say?" 

"it's so… may," august said, and she lifted up the 

note and read it to us. 

dear august and june, 
i'm sorry to leave you like this. i hate you being 
sad, but think how happy i'll be with april, mama, papa, 
and  big  mama.  picture  us  up  there  together,  and  that 
will help some. i'm tired of carrying around the weight of 
the world. i'm just going to lay it down now. it's my time 
to die, and it's your time to live. don't mess it up. 

love, may 

303 

 

august  laid  the  note  down  and  turned  to  june. 
she opened her arms wide, and june walked into them. 
they  clung  to  each  other—big  sister  to  little  sister, 
bosom  to  bosom,  their  chins  wrapped  around  each 
other's necks. 

they  stayed  that  way  long  enough  for  me  to 
wonder—should  rosaleen  and  i  leave  the  room?—but 
finally they unwound themselves, and we all sat with the 
smell of banana cream pie. 

june said, "do you think it was really her time to 

die?" 

"i don't  know," said august. "maybe it was. but 
one  thing  may  was  right  about  is  that  it's  our  time  to  
live.  it's  her  dying  wish  that  we  do  that,  june,  so  we  
need to see to it. all right?" 

"what do you mean?" said june. 
we  watched  august  walk  over  to  the  window, 
put  her  hands  on  the  countertop,  and  gaze  out  at  the 
sky. it was aquamarine and shiny as taffeta. you had the 
feeling she was making a big decision. june pulled out a 
chair, sat down. 

"august, what?" 
when august turned back, her jaw was set. "i'm 
going to say something to you, june." she walked over 
and  stood  in  front  of  her.  "you've  been  halfway  living 
your life for too long. may was saying that when it's time 

 

304 

to die, go ahead and die, and when it's time to live, live. 
don't  sort-of-maybe  live,  but  live  like  you're  going  all 
out, like you're not afraid." 

"i  don't  know  what  you're  talking  about,"  june 

said. 

"i'm saying marry neil." 
"what?" 
"ever  since  melvin  edwards  backed  out  of  your 
wedding all those years back, you've been afraid of love, 
refusing to take a chance. like may said, it's your time to 
live. don't mess it up." 

june's mouth sat open in a wide circle, and not a 

word crossed her lips. 

suddenly  the  air  was  coated  with  the  smell  of  
burning.  rosaleen flung open the oven  and yanked out 
the pie to find every last meringue tip scorched. 

"we'll eat it like that," said august. "a little burn 

taste never hurt anybody." 

• • • 
every day for four days straight we kept the vigil. 
august  had  may's  note  with  her  at  all  times,  tucked  in  
her pocket or slipped under her belt if she had on a no-
pocket dress.  i watched june, how she seemed quieter 
since august had lowered the boom on her about neil. 
not  exactly  sulking.  contemplating  is  more  like  it.  i 
would  catch  her  sitting  beside  the  coffin  leaning  her 

 

305 

forehead  against  it,  and  you  could  tell  she  was  doing 
more  than  saying  good-bye  to  may.  she  was  trying  to 
find her own answers to things. 

one afternoon august  and zach and  i went  out 
to the hives and took off the black cloths. august said we 
couldn't  leave  them  on  too  long,  since  the  bees  had 
memorized everything about their hive and a change like 
that could make them disoriented. they might not find 
their way home again, she said. 

tell me about it, i thought. 
the daughters of mary showed up each day just 
before lunch and sat in the parlor with may through the 
afternoon, telling stories about her. we cried a good bit 
also,  but  i  could  tell  we  were  starting  to  feel  better 
about saying good-bye. i only hoped may was feeling all 
right about it, too. 

neil  stayed  at  the  house  nearly  as  much  as  the  
daughters, and seemed downright confused by the way 
june stared into his face. she could barely play the cello, 
because  it  meant  turning  loose of  his  hand. to  tell  the 
truth, the rest of us spent nearly as much time watching 
june and neil as we did seeing may into the next life. 

on the afternoon that the funeral home came to 
pick  up  may  for  the  burial,  bees  buzzed  around  the 
front-window screens. as the coffin was loaded into the 

 

306 

hearse,  bee  hum  swelled  and  blended  into  the  late-
afternoon colors. yellow-gold. red. tinges of brown. 

i could still hear them humming at the graveside, 
even though we were miles away in a colored cemetery 
with crumbled markers and weeds. the sound carried on 
the  breezes  while  we  huddled  together  and  watched 
them lower may's coffin into the ground. august passed 
around  a paper  bag full  of  manna,  and we  scooped  up 
handfuls  and  threw  the  seeds  into  the  hole  with  the 
coffin,  and  my  ears  were  filled  with  nothing  but  bee 
hum. 

that night, in my bed in the honey house, when i 
closed  my  eyes,  bee  hum  ran  through  my  body.  ran 
through the whole earth. it was the oldest sound there 
was. souls flying away. 
 
 

 

 

307 

chapter eleven 

it  takes  honeybee  workers  ten  million 
foraging  trips  to  gather  enough  nectar  to  make 
one pound of honey. 

—bees of the world 
 
for  may's  burial  august  shut  down  honey 
making,  honey  selling,  even  bee  patrol.  she  and  june 
took the meals that rosaleen cooked to their rooms. i 
barely  saw  august  except  in  the  mornings  when  she 
crossed the yard headed toward the woods. she would 
wave at me, and if i ran over and asked where she was 
going,  could  i  come,  too,  she  would  smile  and  say  not 
today, that she was still doing her mourning. sometimes 
she would stay out in the woods past lunch. 

i had to fight an impulse to say, but i need to talk 
to  you.  life was so  funny.  i'd  spent  over a  month  here 
dillydallying  around,  refusing  to  tell  august  about  my 
mother when i could have done it so easy, and now that 
i  really  needed  to  tell  her,  i  couldn't.  you  just  don't 

 

308 

interrupt 
problems. 

somebody's  mourning  with  your  own 

i  helped  rosaleen  some  in  the  kitchen,  but 
mostly  i  was  free  to  lie  around  and  write  in  my  
notebook. i wrote so many things from my heart that i 
used up all the pages. 

it  surprised  me  no  end  how  much  i  missed  our 
ordinary,  routine  life—the  simple  act  of  pouring  wax 
into  a  candle  mold  or  repairing  a  broken  hive  box. 
kneeling between august  and june for  evening prayers 
to our lady. 

i  walked  in  the  woods  in  the  afternoon  when  i 
was sure august wasn't out there. i would pick out a tree 
and say, if a bird lands in that tree before i count to ten, 
that is my mother sending her sign of love. when i got to 
seven, i would start counting real slow, dragging it out. i 
would get to fifty sometimes, and no bird. 

i studied my map of south carolina at night when 
everyone  was  asleep,  trying  to  figure  where  me  and 
rosaleen might head next. i had always wanted to see 
the rainbow-colored houses of charleston, how they had 
real horse and buggies on the street, but as appealing as 
all that was, it nearly crushed me to think of leaving. and 
even if another cantaloupe truck miraculously appeared 
and drove us down there, rosaleen and i would have to 

 

309 

get  jobs  somewhere,  rent  a  place  to  stay,  and  hope  
nobody asked any questions. 

sometimes  i  didn't  even  feel  like  getting  out  of  
bed. i took to wearing my days-of-the-week panties out 
of order. it could be monday and i'd have on underwear 
saying thursday. i just didn't care. 

the  only  time  i  saw  june  was  when  neil  came  
over, which was  every single  day.  she would  come  out 
wearing  hoop  earrings,  and  off  they'd  go,  taking  long 
rides in his car, which, she said, did her a world of good. 
the wind rearranged her thoughts, and the countryside 
made her see all the life still left out there waiting to be 
lived. neil would get behind the wheel, and june would 
slide over on the front seat so she was practically under 
the wheel with him. honestly, i worried for their safety. 

• • • 
zach  showed  up  a  few  times  just  to  visit  and 
found  me in the lawn  chair  with  my legs  tucked  under 
me, reading back over my notebook. sometimes when i 
saw  him my  stomach went  through a  series of  sudden 
drops and lurches. 

"you  are  one-third  friend,  one-third  brother, 
one-third  bee  partner,  and  one-third  boyfriend,"  i  told 
him.  he  explained  to  me  i  had  one  too  many  thirds  in  
the  equation,  which,  of  course,  i  knew,  as  i  am  bad  in 

 

310 

math but not that bad. we stared at each other as i tried 
to figure out which third would get deleted. 

i said, "if i was a negro girl—" 
he placed his fingers across my lips so i tasted his 

saltiness. 

"we  can't  think  of  changing  our  skin,"  he  said. 

"change the world—that's how we gotta think." 

all he  could talk about was going to law school 
and  busting  ass.  he  didn't  say  white  ass,  and  i  was 
thankful for that, but i believe that's what he meant. 

there  was  a  place  inside  him  now  that  hadn't 
been there before. heated, charged, angry. coming into 
his presence was like stepping up to a gas heater, to a 
row  of  blue  fire  burning  in  the  dark,  wet  curve  of  his 
eyes. 

his conversations were all about the race riots in 
new jersey, policemen taking their nightsticks to negro 
boys who threw rocks, about molotov cocktails, sit-ins, 
righteous  causes,  malcolm  x,  and  the  afro-american 
unity group giving the ku klux klan a taste of their own 
medicine. 

i wanted to say to zach, remember when we ate 
may's  kool-aid  ice  under  the  pine  trees?  remember 
when you sang "blueberry hill"? remember? 

• • • 

 

311 

after  nonstop  mourning  all  week,  just  when  i 
thought we would go on forever in our private, grieving 
worlds  and  never  again  eat  another  meal  together  or 
work side by side in the honey house, i found rosaleen 
in the kitchen laying the table for four, using the sunday-
china plates with pink flowers and lacy scallops around 
the  edge.  i  broke  out  with  happiness  because  life 
seemed headed back to normal. 

rosaleen put a beeswax candle on the table, and 
i believe that was the first candle-lit meal of my entire 
life.  here  was  the  menu:  smothered  chicken,  rice  and 
gravy,  butter  beans,  sliced  tomatoes,  biscuits,  and 
candlelight. 

we had barely started in when rosaleen said to 

june, "so are you gonna marry neil or not?" 

august and i both stopped chewing and sat up. 
"that's for me to know and you to find out," june 

answered. 

"and  how  are  we  supposed  to  find  out,  if  you 

won't tell us?" said rosaleen. 

when  we'd  finished  the  food,  august  produced 
four bottles of ice-cold coca-cola from the refrigerator, 
along  with  four  little  packages  of  salted  peanuts.  we  
watched her pop the tops off the cokes. 

"what the heck is this?" said june. 

 

312 

"it's lily's and my  favorite dessert," august told 
her,  smiling  over  at  me.  "we  like  to  pour  our  peanuts  
straight into the bottle, but you can eat yours separately 
if you prefer." 

"i think i prefer mine separate," said june, rolling 

her eyes. 

"i  wanted  to  make  a  cobbler,"  rosaleen  told 
june,  "but  august  said  it  was  gonna  be  cokes  and 
peanuts."  she  said  "cokes  and  peanuts"  the  way  you 
might say "snot and boogers." 

august  laughed.  "they  don't  know  a  delicacy 

when they see one, do they, lily?" 

"no, ma'am," i said, shaking the peanuts into my 
bottle, where they caused a little reaction of foam, then 
floated on the brown liquid. i drank and munched with 
the  glory  of  salt  and  sweet  in  my  mouth  at  the  same  
time, all the while looking toward the window, at birds 
flying home to their nests and moonlight just starting to 
pour down on the midlands of south carolina, this place 
where  i  was  tucked  away  with  three  women  whose 
faces shone with candle glow. 

when we had drained the cokes, we went to the 
parlor to say our hail marys together for the first time 
since may had died. 

i  knelt  on  the  rug  by  june,  while  rosaleen,  as  
usual, helped herself to the rocker. august stood beside 

 

313 

our lady and folded may's suicide letter so it resembled 
a tiny paper airplane. she wedged it into a deep crevice 
that  ran  down  the  side  of  our  lady's  neck.  then  she 
patted black mary's shoulder and let out a long sigh that 
made the airless room feel alive again. and said, "well, 
that's that." 

i'd been staying up in may's room with rosaleen 
ever since may died, but when rosaleen and i started to 
climb the stairs that night, on impulse i said, "you know 
what?  i  think  i'll  move  back  into  the  honey  house."  i  
found out i'd missed having a room to myself. 

rosaleen  put  her  hands  on  her  waist.  "good 
lord,  all  that fuss  you made about me moving out and 
leaving you, now here you are wanting to leave me." 

actually, she didn't care one bit that i wanted to 
move out; she just couldn't pass up a chance to give me 
a hard time. "come on, i'll help you carry your stuff over 
there," she said. 

"you mean, now?" 
"no time like the present," she told me. 
i  guess  she'd  missed  having  a  room  to  herself, 

too. 

after rosaleen left, i looked around my old room 
in the honey house—it was so quiet. all i could think was 
how  this  time  tomorrow  the  truth  would  be  out,  how 
everything would change. 

 

314 

i  got  my  mother's  photograph  and  the  black 
mary picture from my bag, ready to show august. i slid 
them under my pillow, but when i turned out the light, 
fear  filled  up  my  hard,  narrow  bed.  it  told  me  all  the  
ways  life  could  go  wrong.  it  had  me  in  a  girls'  prison  
camp  in  the  florida  everglades.  why  the  everglades,  i 
don't  know,  except  i've  always  thought  that  would  be 
the worst place to be in prison. think of all the alligators 
and  snakes,  not  to  mention  heat  worse  than  we  had 
here,  and  people  had  been  known  to  fry  not  just  eggs 
but  bacon  and  sausage  on  south  carolina  sidewalks.  i 
could not imagine breathing in florida. i would be down 
there suffocating and never see august again. 

it  was  fear  all  night  long.  i  would've  given 
anything to be back in may's room, listening to rosaleen 
snore. 

• • • 
the next morning i slept late, considering the on-
and-off night i'd had, plus i'd been falling into lazy habits 
without  the  honey  house  to  keep  me  industrious.  the 
smell of fresh-baked cake wafted all the way  from the 
pink house to my cot, curled into my nostrils, and woke 
me up. 

when  i  got  to  the  kitchen,  there  were  august, 
june,  and  rosaleen,  dusted  with  flour,  baking  these 
small one-layer cakes the size of honey buns. they were 

 

315 

singing  while  they  worked,  singing  like  the  supremes, 
like the marvelettes, like the crystals wiggling their butts 
to "da doo ron ron." 

"what are y'all doing?" i said, grinning from the 

doorway. 

they  stopped  singing  and  giggled,  giving  each 

other little shoves and nudges. 

"well, look who's up," said rosaleen. 
june  had  on  lavender  pedal  pushers  with  daisy 
buttons  up  the  sides,  the  likes  of  which  i'd  never  seen 
before. she said, "we're baking cakes for mary day. it's 
about  time  you  got  over  here  and  helped  us.  didn't 
august tell you this was mary day?" 

i glanced at august. "no, ma'am, she didn't." 
august, who  was wearing one  of may's  aprons, 
the  one  with  ruffles  trailing  over  the  shoulders,  wiped 
her hands across the front and said, "i guess i forgot to 
mention  it.  we've  been  celebrating  mary  day  around 
here  every  august  for  fifteen  years.  come  on  and  get 
your breakfast, and then you can help us. we've got so 
much to do i don't know whether we're gonna make it." 
i filled a bowl with rice krispies and milk, trying 
to think over the snap-crackle conversation it was having 
with  itself.  how  was  i  supposed  to  have  a  life-altering 
talk with august with all this going on? 

 

316 

"a  thousand  years  ago  women  were  doing  this 
exact same thing," said august. "baking cakes for mary 
on her feast day." 

june looked at my blank face. "today is the feast 
of  the assumption. august fifteenth.  don't tell  me you 
never heard that." 

oh, sure, the feast of  the assumption—brother 
gerald preached on that every other sunday. of course 
i'd never heard of it. i shook my head. "we didn't really 
allow mary at our church except at christmas." 

august smiled and dunked a wooden drizzle into 
the  vat  of  honey,  which  sat  on  the  counter  by  the 
toaster oven. while she spun honey across the tops of a 
fresh pan of cakes, she explained to me in detail how the 
assumption  was  nothing  less  than  mary  rising  up  to 
heaven. mary died and woke up, and the angels carried 
her up there in swirling clouds. 

"may is the one who started calling it mary day," 

said june. 

"it's  not  just  about  the  assumption,  though," 
august  said,  shoveling  the  cakes  onto  the  wire  racks. 
"it's a special remembrance for our own lady of chains. 
we reenact her story. plus we give thanks for the honey 
crop. the daughters of mary come. it's our favorite two 
days of the year." 

"you do this for two days?" 

317 

 

"we  start  this  evening  and  finish  tomorrow 
afternoon,"  said  august.  "hurry  up  with  your  cereal, 
because  you've  got  to  make  streamers  and  garlands, 
hang  the  christmas  lights,  put  out  the  candleholders, 
wash the wagon, and get out the chains." 

i was thinking, whoa, back up. wash the wagon? 
hang christmas lights? get out the chains? the chains? 
the  knock  on  the  back  door  came  as  i  was  putting  my  
bowl in the sink. "if this isn't the best-smelling house in 
tiburon,  i'll  be  a  monkey's  uncle,"  said  neil,  stepping 
inside. 

"well,  i  guess  you're  saved  from  that  special 

relationship then," june said. 

she offered him a honey cake, but he shook his 
head,  which  was  a  dead  giveaway  right  there  that  he 
had  something  on  his  mind.  neil  did  not  refuse  food. 
ever. he stood in the middle of the floor, shuffling from 
one foot to the other. 

"what are you doing here?" june asked. 
he cleared his throat, rubbed his sideburns. "i—i 

came over here hoping for a word with you." 

this  sounded  so  stiff  coming  out  of  his  mouth 
that june narrowed her eyes and studied him a second. 
"are you all right?" 

"i'm fine." he put his hands in his pockets. took 

them out. "i just want a word with you." 

 

318 

she stood there waiting. "well, i'm listening," she 

said. 

"i thought we could take a drive." 
she  looked  around  the  kitchen.  "if  you  haven't 

noticed, i'm up to my ears in work, neil." 

"i can see that, but—" 
"look, just tell me what it is," june said, starting 
to  get  into  one  of  her  huffs.  "what  is  so  all-fired 
important?" 

i  glanced  at  august,  who  had  her  lips  screwed 
over  to  the  side,  trying  to  look  busy.  rosaleen,  on  the  
other  hand,  had  stopped  all  semblance  of  work  and 
looked from june to neil. back to june. 

"hell," he said, "i came over here planning to ask 

you, for the hundredth time, to marry me." 

i dropped my spoon in the sink. august laid down 
the honey drizzle. june opened her mouth and closed it 
without anything coming out. everyone just stood there. 

come on. don't mess up your time to live. 
the  house  creaked,  like  old  houses  do.  neil 
glanced at the door. i felt my shirt dampen all under my 
arms.  i  had  the  sensation  i  used  to  get  in  fifth  grade  
when the teacher would write some nonsense word on 
the  blackboard, 
like  "pnteahel,"  and  we  had  two 
minutes to unscramble it and find the word "elephant" 
before she dinged her bell. i used to break out in a sweat 

 

319 

trying to beat the clock. i had that feeling now, like neil 
was  going  to  walk  out  the  door  before  june  could 
unscramble the answer in her heart. 

rosaleen said, "well, don't just stand there with 

your mouth open, june. say something." 

june stared at neil, and i could see the struggle 
in her face. the surrender she had to  make inside. not 
just to neil but to life. 

finally  she  let  out  a  long,  sighing  breath.  "all 

right," she said. "let's get married." 

rosaleen slapped her thigh and burst out with a 
whoop,  while  august  broke  into  the  biggest  smile  i 
believe i'd ever seen on her face. me, i just looked from 
one person to another, trying to take it in. 

neil  walked  over  and  kissed  june  right  on  the 
mouth.  i didn't think  they were  ever  going to come up 
for air. 

when  they  did,  neil  said,  "we're  going  to  the 
jewelry store this minute and pick out a ring before you 
change your mind." 

june cast a look back at august. "well, i hate to 
leave them with all this work," she said, but i could tell 
she didn't mind a bit. 

"go on," august said. 
• • • 

 

320 

when  they'd  left,  august,  rosaleen,  and  i  sat 
down and ate honey cake while it was still  hot, talking 
over what had just happened. 

we  had  all  these  chores  facing  us,  but  some 
things you have to sit and mull over before you can go 
on.  we  said,  "did  you  see  the  look  on  neil's  face?"… 
"can  you  believe  that  kiss?"  mostly  we  just  stared  at 
each other, saying "june's getting married!" 

getting  ready  for  mary  day  was  nonstop  work. 
first  august  got  me  started  on  the  streamers.  i  cut  
packages of thick blue-and white crepe paper into strips 
till i had rubbed blisters on both thumbs. i formed little 
twists in the edges with my fingers to give them a curled 
effect,  then  dragged  the  stepladder  into  the  yard  and 
hung them from the myrtle trees. 

i clear-cut the gladiolus bed and made a six-foot 
garland  by  wiring  the  blossoms  to  a  piece  of  string, 
which  i thought  i never  would get right.  when  i  asked 
august  what  i  was  supposed  to  do  with  it,  she  said, 
"drape  it  around  the  wagon."  well,  of  course.  why 
didn't i think of that? 

next i rummaged around in the hall closet for the 
christmas  lights,  which  she  had  me  wind  around  the 
bushes by the back porch steps, not to mention all the 
extension cords  i had to  rig. as  i worked, zach pushed 
the lawn mower, shirtless. i set up the card tables beside 

 

321 

the myrtle trees so the streamers would drift  over and 
tickle our faces while we ate. i tried not to look at him, 
his  tight  skin  sparkling  with  sweat,  his  dogtag  hanging 
from the chain around his neck, his shorts slung low on 
his hips, the little tuft of hair starting under his navel. 

he hoed up a big infestation of cabbage weeds, 
without even being asked to. he swung the hoe with a 
blaze  of  angry  grunts, while  i sat on the  steps  and  dug 
candle  wax  out  of  two  dozen  glass  holders.  i  refilled 
them with fresh candles and set them all around on the 
grass, under the trees, mostly in the little holes of earth 
where the cabbage weeds had grown. 

up  on  the  back  porch  august  cranked  the  ice 
cream churn. beside her feet sat a coil of chains. i stared 
at it. "what's that for?" 

"you'll see," she said. 
• • • 
at  6:00  p.m.  i  was  exhausted  from  mary  day  
goings-on,  and  the  real  part  hadn't  even  started.  i  got 
the  last  thing  on  my  list  done  and  was  headed  to  the 
honey house to get dressed, when june and neil pulled 
into the driveway. 

june  waltzed  up  with  her  hand  stuck  out  so  i 
could admire her ring. i looked it over, and i have to say 
neil had outdone himself. it wasn't that big, really, it was 

 

322 

just  so  pretty.  the  diamond  was  tucked 
scalloped silver setting. 

inside  a 

"that's the most beautiful ring i've ever seen," i 

said. 

she  kept  her  hand  stretched  out,  turning  it  this 
way  and  that,  letting  the  diamond  catch  the  light.  "i 
think may would have loved it, too," she said. 

the first carload of the daughters drove up then, 
and  june  sauntered  toward  them  with  her  hand 
outstretched. 

inside the honey house i lifted up my pillow to be 
sure  my  mother's  photograph  and  her  black  mary 
picture were still underneath like i'd left them. feast day 
or not, tonight had to be the night i got the truth from 
august.  the  thought  set  off  a  nervous  quiver  through 
me.  i  sat  down  on  the  cot  and  felt  things  building 
inside—pushing against my chest. 

heading  back  to  the  pink  house,  wearing  clean 
shorts  and  a  top,  my  hair  all  combed,  i  stopped  to  
behold  everything.  august,  june,  rosaleen,  zach,  neil, 
otis, and all the daughters of mary stood around on the 
mowed grass beside the card tables, their laughter low 
and  vibrating.  piles  of  food.  blue-and-white  streamers 
rippling  in  the  breezes.  the  christmas  lights  glowed  in 
spirals  of  color  around  the  porch,  and  all  the  candles 

 

323 

were lit,  even though the sun  was still working its way 
down. every molecule of air gave off red fire. 

i said to myself, i love this place with my whole 

heart. 

the  daughters  fussed  over  me—how  good  i 
smelled,  how  exceptional  my  hair  was  when  it  was 
combed. 

lunelle said, "would you like me to make you a 

hat, lily?" 

"really? you'd make me a hat?" where i would 
wear a lunelle-created hat was a mystery, but i wanted 
one all the same. at the least, i could get buried in it one 
day. 

"of course i'll make you a hat. i'll make you a hat 

you won't believe. what color would you like?" 

august,  who  was  listening  in,  said,  "blue,"  and 

winked at me. 

first we ate. by now i'd learned eating was a high 
priority  with  the  daughters.  when  we  finished,  the 
redness  had  seeped  from  the  day  and  night  was 
arranging  herself  around  us.  cooling  things  down, 
staining  and  dyeing the  evening  purple  and blue  black. 
rosaleen brought out the platter of honey cakes and set 
them on one of the tables. 

august motioned us to stand around the table in 

a circle. the mary day program was under way. 

 

324 

"these  are  mary's  honey  cakes.  cakes  for  the 

queen of heaven," august said. 

she took one of them in her hand and, pinching 
off a  piece, held it before  mabelee, who stood next to 
her  in  the  circle.  august  said,  "this  is  the  body  of  the  
blessed mother." mabelee closed her eyes and opened 
her mouth, and august laid the cake on her tongue. 

after mabelee had swallowed, she did the same 
thing august had done—snipped off a piece and gave it 
to  the  next  person  in  the  circle,  who  happened  to  be 
neil.  mabdee,  who  could  not  have  measured  five  feet 
tall in spike heels, practically needed a stepladder to get 
up to his mouth. neil crouched down and opened wide. 
"this is the body of the mother," mabelee said, 
and popped it in. i did not know one thing, really, about 
the catholic  church,  but somehow  i felt  sure the  pope 
would  have  keeled  over  if  he'd  seen  this.  not  brother 
gerald, though. he wouldn't have wasted time fainting, 
just gotten busy arranging the exorcism. 

me, i had never seen grown-ups feed each other, 
and i watched with the feeling i might burst out crying. i 
don't  know  what  got  to  me  about  it,  but  for  some 
reason that circle of feeding made me feel better about 
the world. 

as life would have it, the one who fed me turned 
out to be june. opening my mouth, closing my eyes, and 

 

325 

waiting  for  the  body  of  the  mother,  i  heard  june's 
whisper brush my ear—"i'm sorry for being hard on you 
when  you  first  got  here"—and  then  the  sweetness  of 
honey cake spread through my mouth. 

i wished it could have been zach standing next to 
me so i could lay the cake on his tongue. i would have 
said, i hope this softens you toward the world. i hope it 
brings  you  a  tender  feeling.  instead  i  got  to  give  the  
pinch of cake to cressie, who ate it with her eyes closed. 

• • • 
after we were all fed, zach and neil went to the 
parlor  and  returned  carrying  our  lady  of  chains.  otis 
followed  after  them,  lugging  the  pile  of  chain.  they 
stood her upright in the red wagon. august leaned over 
to me. "we're going to reenact the story of our lady of 
chains.  we're  taking  her  over  to  the  honey  house  and 
chaining her in there for the night." 

i thought,  our lady is spending the night in  the 

honey house. with me. 

as  august  pulled  the  wagon  slowly  across  the 
yard, zach and neil braced our lady with their hands. if i 
do say so, the flower garland around the wagon set the 
whole thing off. 

june  carried  her  cello,  while  the  daughters 
trailed  the  wagon  single  file,  carrying  burning  candles. 

 

326 

they sang, "mary, star of the sea, mary, brightest moon, 
mary, comb of honey." 

rosaleen  and  i  brought  up  the  rear,  toting 
candles, too, trying to hum along, since we didn't know 
the words. i cupped one hand around  the flame  of  my 
candle to be sure it didn't blow out. 

at  the  door  of  the  honey  house,  neil  and  zach 
lifted the statue out of the wagon and carried her inside. 
sugar-girl nudged otis with her elbow, and he stepped 
up  and  helped  them  get  her  situated  between  the 
extractor and the baffle tank. 

"all right," august said. "now we'll start the last 
part of our service. why don't you stand in a semicircle 
right here around our lady." 

june  played  us  a  gloomy-sounding  song  on  the 
cello  while  august  retold  black  mary's  story  start  to 
finish.  when  she  got  to  the  part  about  the  slaves 
touching our lady's heart and how she filled them with 
fearlessness  and  plans  of  escape,  june  turned  up  the 
volume. 

"our  lady  became  so  powerful,"  said  august, 
"that  the  master  was  forced  to  put  her  under  house 
arrest, to chain her in the carriage house. she was cast 
down and bound up." 

"the blessed, blessed mother," mumbled violet. 

 

327 

neil  and  otis  took  the  chains  and  started 
wrapping  them  around  our  lady.  the  way  otis  tossed 
the chain around in the candlelight, i was sure it would 
be a miracle if he didn't kill somebody. august went on. 
"but each time the master chained mary in the carriage 
house,  she  would  break  the  chains  and  return  to  her 
people." 

august  paused.  she went  around  the  circle  and 
looked at us one by one, letting her eyes settle on each 
face like she wasn't in any kind of rush. 

then she lifted her voice. "what is bound will be 
unbound. what is cast down will be lifted up. this is the 
promise of our lady." 

"amen," said otis. 
june began to play again, this time a more joyful 
tune, thank goodness. i gazed at mary, wrapped head to 
toe in rusted chain. outside, heat lightning pulsed across 
the sky. 

they  all  seemed  to be  sunk  in  their  meditating, 
or  whatever  it  was  they  were  doing.  everyone's  eyes 
were  closed,  except  zach's.  he  stared  right  at  me.  i 
glanced  at  poor,  shackled  mary.  i  couldn't  bear  seeing 
her like that. 

"it is only a reenactment," august  had said.  "to 
help  us  remember.  remembering  is  everything."  still, 

 

328 

the  whole 
remembering. 

idea  wrapped  me 

in  sadness. 

i  hated 

i turned and walked out of the honey house, into 

the warm hush of night. 

• • • 
zach caught up with me as i reached the tomato 
garden. he took my hand, and we kept walking, stepping 
over  may's  wall,  walking 
into  the  woods  without 
speaking.  the  cicadas  were  going  crazy,  filling  the  air 
with their strange brand of singing. twice i walked into a 
spider's web, feeling the fine, transparent threads across 
my  face,  and  i  liked  them  there.  a  veil  spun  from  the 
night. 

i wanted the river. its wildness. i wanted to strip 
naked and let the water  lick  my skin. suck river  stones 
the way i'd done that night rosaleen and i'd slept by the 
creek. even may's death had not ruined the river for me. 
the  river  had  done  its  best,  i  was  sure,  to  give  her  a  
peaceful ride out of this life. you could die in a river, but 
maybe you could get reborn in it, too, like the beehive 
tombs august had told me about. 

beneath  the  trees,  moonlight  trailed  down. 

isteered us toward the water. 

water can be so shiny in the dark. we stood on 
the  bank  and  watched  the  moving  pockets  of  light, 
letting  the  water  sounds  swell  up around  us.  we  were 

 

329 

still  holding hands, and i felt his fingers tighten around 
mine. 

"there was a pond near where i used to live," i 
said. "sometimes i would go there to wade in the water. 
one day the boys from the next farm were there fishing. 
they had all these little fish they'd caught fastened onto 
a stringer. they held me down on the bank and hooked 
it around my neck, making it too small to pull over my 
head. i was shouting, "let me up, get that off me," but 
they laughed and said, 'what's the matter, don't you like 
your fish necklace?'" 

"goddamn boys," zach said. 
"a few of the fish were already dead, but most of 
them  flapped  around  with  their  eyes  staring  at  me, 
looking scared. i realized if i swam out into the water up 
to my neck, they could breathe. i got as far as my knees, 
but  then  i  turned  back.  i  was  too  afraid  to  go  any  
further. i think that was the worst part. i could've helped 
them, but i didn't." 

"you couldn't have stayed out there in the pond 

forever," zach said. 

"but i could've stayed a long time. all i did was 
beg them to undo the stringer. begged. they said to shut 
up, i was their fish holder, so i sat there till all the fish 
died against my chest. i dreamed about them for a year. 

 

330 

sometimes i would be hooked on the chain along with 
them." 

"i know that feeling," he said. 
i looked as far into his eyes as i could see. 
"getting arrested—" i didn't know how to put it. 
"what about it?" he said. 
"it changed you, didn't it?" 
he stared at the water. "sometimes, lily, i'm so 

angry i wanna kill something." 

"those boys who  made me  wear the fish—they 
were  angry  like  that,  too.  angry  at  the  world,  and  it  
made  them  mean.  you  have  to  promise  me,  zach,  you  
won't be like them." 

"i don't want to," he said. 
"me either." 
he bent his face close to mine and kissed me. at 
first  it  was  like  moth  wings  brushing  my  lips,  then  his 
mouth  opening  on  mine.  i  gave  way  against  him.  he 
kissed  me  gently,  but  at  the  same  time  hungrily,  and  i  
liked how he tasted, the scent of his skin, the way his lips 
opened and closed, opened and closed. i was floating on 
a river of light. escorted by fish. jeweled with fish. and 
even with so much beautiful aching inside my body, with 
life throbbing beneath my skin and the rushing ways of 
love  taking  over,  even  with  all  of  that,  i  could  feel  the  
fish dying against my heart. 

 

331 

when  the  kiss  was  over,  he  looked  at  me  with 
burning in  his  face. "nobody will  believe how  hard i'm 
gonna  study  this  year.  that  jail  cell  is  gonna  make  me 
earn grades higher than i ever got. and when this year is 
over, nothing can keep me from leaving here and going 
to college." 

"i  know  you'll  do  it,"  i  said.  "you  will."  and  it  
wasn't  just  words.  i'm  good  at  sizing  up  people,  and  i 
knew  for  a  fact  he  would  make  himself  into  a  lawyer.  
changes  were  coming,  even  to  south  carolina—you 
could practically smell them in the air—and zach would 
help bring them. he would be one of those drum majors 
for freedom that martin luther king talked about. that's 
how i liked to think of zach now. a drum major. 

he faced me, and shifting around on his feet, he 
said,  "i  want  you  to  know  that  i—"  he  stopped  and  
looked up into the treetops. 

i stepped nearer to him. "you want me to know 

what?" 

"that  i—i  care  about  you.  i  think  about  you  all 

the time." 

it crossed my mind to say there were things he 
didn't know about me, that he might not care so much if 
he knew them, but i smiled and said, "i care about you, 
too." 

 

332 

"we  can't  be  together  now,  lily,  but  one  day, 
after i've gone away and become somebody, i'm gonna 
find you, and we'll be together then." 

"you promise?" 
"i  promise."  he  lifted  the  chain  with  his  dogtag 
from around his neck and lowered it over my head. "so 
you won't forget, okay?" 

the  silver  rectangle  dropped  down  under  my 
shirt,  where  it  dangled  cold  and  certain  between  my 
breasts.zachary  lincoln  taylor,  resting  there,  along  my 
heart. 

wading in up to my neck. 

 
 

 

 

333 

chapter twelve 

if  the  queen  were  smarter,  she  would 
probably  be hopelessly  neurotic.  as is, she  is shy 
and skittish, possibly because she never leaves the 
hive, but spends her days confined in darkness, a 
kind  of  eternal  night,  perpetually  in  labor….  her 
true role is less that of a queen than mother of 
the hive,  a title often accorded to  her. and yet, 
this is something of a mockery because of her lack 
of maternal instincts or the ability to care for her 
young. 

—the queen must die: and other affairs of 
bees and men 
 
i  waited  for  august  in  her  room.  waiting  was  a  
thing  i'd  had  lots  of  experience  doing.  waiting  for  the 
girls  at  school  to  invite  me  somewhere.  for  t.  ray  to  
change his ways. for the police to show up and drag us 

 

334 

off  to  the  everglades  prison.  for  my  mother  to  send  a 
sign of love. 

zach  and  i  had  hung  around  outside  till  the 
daughters  of  mary  finished  in  the  honey  house.  we'd 
helped them clean up the mess in the yard, me stacking 
plates and cups and zach folding up card tables. queenie 
had smiled and said, "how come you two left before we 
finished?" 

"it got too long," said zach. 
"so that's what it was," she teased, and cressie 

giggled. 

when  zach  left,  i  slipped  back  into  the  honey 
house  and  retrieved  my  mother's  photograph  and  her 
black  mary  picture 
from  underneath  my  pillow. 
clutching them in my hands, i glided past the daughters 
as they finished up the dishes in the kitchen. they called 
to me, "where're you going, lily?" 

i hated to be rude, but i found i couldn't answer, 
couldn't  speak  a  word  of  idle  talk.  i  wanted  to  know  
about my mother. i didn't care about anything else. 

i  marched  straight  into  august's  room,  a  room 
filled  with  the  smell  of  beeswax.  i  switched  on  a  lamp  
and sat on the cedar chest at the end of her bed, where i 
folded and unfolded my hands eight or ten times. they 
were  cool,  damp,  with  a  mind  of  their  own.  all  they  

 

335 

wanted to do was fidget and pop knuckles. i stuck them 
under my thighs. 

the  only  other  time  i'd  been  in  august's  room 
was  the time i'd  fainted during the daughters  of  mary 
meeting and wakened in her bed. i must have been too 
muddled  then  to  see  it,  because  it  all  seemed  new  to 
me.  you  could've  wandered  around  in  this  room  for 
hours and had a field day looking at her stuff. 

for  starters,  everything  was  blue.  bedspread, 
curtains, rug, chair cushion, lamps. don't get the idea it 
was boring, though. she had ten  different shades of  it. 
sky blue, lake blue, sailor blue, aqua blue—you name a 
blue. i had the feeling of scuba diving through the ocean. 
on  her  dressing  table,  where  less  interesting 
people  would're  put  a  jewelry  box  or  a  picture  frame, 
august had a fish aquarium turned upside down with a 
giant piece of honeycomb inside it. honey had oozed out 
and formed puddles on the tray underneath. 

on  her  bedside  tables  were  beeswax  candles, 
melted  down  into  brass  holders.  i  wondered  if  they 
could  be  the  ones  i'd  personally  created.  it  gave  me  a  
little thrill to think so, how i had helped to light august's 
room when it was dark. 

i walked over and inspected the books arranged 
neatly  on  her  bookshelf.  the  advanced  language  of 
beekeeping,  apiary  science,  bee  pollination,  bulfinch's 

 

336 

lap, 

through 

thumbing 

age  of  fable,  the  myths  of  greece,  the  cultivation  of 
honey,  bee  legends  around  the  world,  mary  through 
the ages. i pulled the last one off the shelf and opened it 
across  my 
the  pictures. 
sometimes  mary  was  brunette  and  brown-eyed,  other 
times  blond  and  blue-eyed,  but  gorgeous  every  time. 
she  looked  like  a  miss  america  contestant.  a  miss 
mississippi.  you  can  usually  count  on  the  girls  from 
mississippi to win. i couldn't help wishing to see mary in 
a swimsuit and heels—before her pregnancy, of course. 

the  big  shock,  though,  was  all  the  pictures  of  
mary being presented with a lily by the angel gabriel. in 
every one, where he showed up to tell her she was going 
to  have  the  baby  of  babies,  even  though  she  wasn't 
married yet, he had a big white lily for her. as if this was 
the  consolation  prize  for  the  gossip  she  was  in  for.  i 
closed the book and put it back on the shelf. 

a  breeze  moved  through  the  room  from  the  
open window. i walked to it and stared out at the dark 
fringe  of  trees  by  the  edge  of  the  woods,  a  half  moon 
wedged  like  a  gold  coin  into  a  slot,  about  to  drop 
through the sky with a clink. voices filtered through the 
screen.  women voices.  they rose  in  chirps  and  melted 
away. 

 

337 

the  daughters  were  leaving.  i  twisted  my  hair 
with my fingers, walked around the throw rug in circles, 
the way a dog will do before it settles onto the floor. 

i  thought  about  prison  movies  in  which  they're 
about to electrocute some prisoner—wrongly convicted, 
of  course—the  camera  going  back  and  forth  between 
the  poor  man  sweating  in  his  cell  block  and  the  clock  
creeping toward twelve. 

i sat down on the cedar chest again. 
footsteps  landed  on  the  floorboards  in  the 
hallway, precise, unhurried steps. august steps. i sat up 
straighter,  taller,  my  heart  starting  to  beat  so  i  could 
hear it in my ears. when she stepped into the room, she 
said, "i thought i might find you here." 

i had a desire to bolt past her through the door, 
dive  out  the  window.  you  don't  have  to  do  this,  i  told  
myself, but the wanting rose up. i had to know. 

"remember  when…"  i  said.  my  voice  came  out  
barely a whisper. i cleared my throat. "remember when 
you said we should have a talk?" 

she closed the door. a sound so final. no turning 

back, it said. this is it, it said. 

"i remember it very well." 
i  laid  out  the  photograph  of  my  mother  on  the 
cedar  chest.  august  walked  over  and  picked  up  the 
picture. "you are the spitting image of her." 

 

338 

she  turned  her  eyes  on  me,  her  big,  flickering 
eyes  with  the copper  fire  inside them. i  wished i  could 
look out at the world through them just one time. 

"it's my mother," i said. 
"i  know,  honey.  your  mother  was  deborah 

fontanel owens." 

i looked at her and blinked. she stepped toward 
me,  and  the  yellow  lamplight  glazed  her  glasses  so  i  
could no longer make out her eyes. i shifted my position 
so i could see them better. she dragged the chair from 
her dressing table over to the cedar chest and sat down 
facing  me.  "i'm  so  glad  we're  finally  going  to  talk  this 
out." 

i could feel her knee barely touching mine. a full 
minute passed without  either of  us saying a word. she 
held the picture, and i knew she was waiting for me to 
break the silence. 

"you knew she was my mother all along," i said, 
uncertain whether i felt anger, or betrayal, or just plain 
surprise. she placed her hand on mine and brushed her 
thumb back and forth across my skin. "the first day you 
showed up, i took one look at you and all i could see was 
deborah when she was your age. i knew deborah had a 
daughter, but i thought no, you couldn't be; it was too 
much to believe that deborah's daughter would turn up 

 

339 

in my parlor. then you said your name was lily, and right 
that minute i knew who you were." 

probably i should have expected this. i felt tears 
gather in the back of my throat, and i didn't even know 
why. "but—but—you never said a word. how come you 
didn't tell me?" 

"because you weren't ready to know about her. i 
didn't want to risk you running away again. i wanted you 
to  have  a  chance  to  get  yourself  on  solid  ground,  get  
your heart bolstered up first. there's a fullness of time 
for  things,  lily.  you  have  to  know  when  to  prod  and 
when to be quiet, when to let things take their course. 
that's what i've been trying to do." 

it  grew  so  quiet.  how  could  i  be  mad  at  her?  i  
had done  the same  thing.  held  back  what  i knew,  and 
my reasons were not the least bit noble like hers. 

"may told me," i said. 
"may told you what?" 
"i saw her making a trail of graham crackers and 
marshmallows for the roaches to follow. my father told 
me  once  that  my  mother  used  to  do  the  same  thing.  i  
figured she'd learned it from may. so i asked her, "did 
you ever know a deborah fontanel?"' and she said yes 
she did, that deborah had stayed in the honey house." 

august  shook  her  head.  "goodness,  there's  so 
much to tell. you remember how i told you i worked as a 

 

340 

housekeeper back in richmond, before i got my teaching 
job? well, that was in your mother's house." 

my  mother's  house.  it  seemed  odd  to  think  of 
her  with  a  roof  over  her  head.  a  person  who  lay  on  a  
bed, ate food at a table, took baths in a tub. 
"you knew her when she was little?" 
"i used to take care of her," august said. "i ironed 
her dresses and packed her school lunch in a paper bag. 
she loved peanut butter.  that's all she wanted.  peanut 
butter monday through friday." 

i let out my breath, realizing i'd been holding it. 

"what else did she love?" 

"she  loved  her  dolls.  she  would  hold  little  tea 
parties for them in the garden, and i would make these 
teeny-tiny sandwiches for their plates." she paused, like 
she  was  remembering.  "what  she  didn't 
like  was 
schoolwork. i had to stay after her all the time about it. 
chase  her  around  calling  out  spelling  words.  one  time 
she climbed a tree, hiding up there so she wouldn't have 
to  memorize  a  poem  by  robert  frost.  i  found  her  and 
climbed  up  there  with  the  book  and  wouldn't  let  her 
come down till she could say the whole thing by heart." 

closing  my  eyes,  i  saw  my  mother  perched  
beside august on a tree limb going through each line of 
"stopping  by  woods  on  a  snowy  evening,"  which  i 

 

341 

myself had had to learn for english. i let my head drop, 
closed my eyes. 

"lily,  before  we  talk  any  more  about  your 
mother, i want you to tell me how you came to be here. 
all right?" 

i opened my eyes and nodded. 
"you said your father was dead." 
i glanced down at her hand still on mine, afraid 
she  might  move  it.  "i  made  that  up,"  i  said.  "he's  not 
really dead." he just deserves to be dead. 

"terrence ray," she said. 
"you know my father, too?" 
"no, i never met him, only heard about him from 

deborah." 

"i call him t. ray." 
"not daddy?" 
"he's not the daddy type." 
"what do you mean?" 
"he yells all the time." 
"at you?" 
"at  everything  in  the  world.  but  that's  not  the 

reason i left." 

"then what was it, lily?" 
"t.  ray…  he  told  me  my  mother…"  the  tears  
rushed  up,  and  my  words  came  out  in  high-pitched 
sounds i didn't recognize. 

 

342 

"he said she left me, that she left both of us and 

ran away." 

a wall of glass broke in my chest, a wall i didn't 

even know was there. 

august  slid  up  to  the  edge  of  her  chair  and  
opened  her  arms,  the  way  she'd  opened  them to  june 
that day they'd found may's suicide letter. i leaned into 
them, felt them close around me. one thing is beautiful 
beyond my words to say it: august holding you. 

i was pressed so close to her i felt her heart like a 
small  throbbing  pressure  against  my  chest.  her  hands 
rubbed my back. she didn't say, come on now, stop your 
crying,  everything's  going  to  be  okay,  which  is  the 
automatic thing people say when they want you to shut 
up. she said, "it hurts, i know it does. let it out. just let it 
out-t." 

so  i  did.  with  my  mouth  pressed  against  her 
dress, it seemed like i drew up my whole lifeload of pain 
and hurled it into her breast, heaved it with the force of 
my mouth, and she didn't flinch. 

she  was  wet  with  my  crying.  up  around  her 
collar the cotton of her dress was plastered to her skin. i 
could see her darkness shining through the wet places. 
she  was  like  a  sponge,  absorbing  what  i  couldn't  hold 
anymore. 

 

343 

her hands felt warm on my back, and every time 
i  paused  to  sniff  and  gasp  for  a  little  air,  i  heard  her  
breathing.  steady  and  even.  in  and  out.  as  my  crying 
wound down, i let myself be rocked in her breathing. 

finally i pulled back and looked at her, dazed by 
the force of what had erupted. she ran her finger along 
the slope of my nose and smiled a sad kind of smile. "i'm 
sorry," i said. 

"don't be sorry," she said. 
she  went  to  her  dresser  and  pulled  a  white 
handkerchief from the top drawer. it was folded, ironed, 
with  "a.b."  monogrammed  on  the  front  in  silvery 
threads. she dabbed softly at my face. 

"i want you to know," i said, "i didn't believe t. 
ray  when  he  told  me  that.  i  know  she  never  would've  
left  me  like  that.  i  wanted  to  find  out  about  her  and 
prove how wrong he was." 

i  watched  her  move  her  hand  up  under  her 
glasses  and  pinch  the  place  between  her  eyes.  "and 
that's what made you leave?" 

i  nodded.  "plus,  rosaleen  and  i  got  in  trouble 
downtown, and i knew if i didn't leave, t. ray was gonna 
half kill me, and i was tired of being half killed." 

"what sort of trouble?" 
i  wished  i  didn't  have  to  go  on.  i  looked  at  the  

floor. 

 

344 

"are  you  talking  about  how  rosaleen  got  the 

bruises and the cut on her head?" 

"all she wanted to do was register her name to 

vote." 

she  was 

trying 

like 

august  squinted 

to 
understand.  "all  right, now, you start  at the beginning. 
okay? just take your time and tell me what happened." 
the best i could, i told her the miserable details, 
careful  not  to  leave  anything  out:  rosaleen  practicing 
writing her name, the three men taunting her, how she 
poured snuff juice on their shoes. "a policeman took us 
to  jail,"  i  said,  and  i  heard  how  strange  the  words  
sounded  to  my  ears.  i  could  only  imagine  how  they 
sounded to august. 

"jail?"  she  said.  her  bones  seemed  to  soften  a  
little  in  her  body.  "they  put  you  in  jail?  what  was  the 
charge?" 

"the policeman said rosaleen assaulted the men, 
but  i  was  there,  and  she  was  only  protecting  herself. 
that's all." 

august's 
ramrod straight. 

jaw  tightened,  and  her  back  went 

"how long were you in there?" 
"me, i didn't stay long. t. ray came and got me 
out, but they wouldn't let rosaleen go, and then those 
men came back and beat her up." 

 

345 

"mother  of  god,"  said  august.  the  words 
hovered  over  us.  i  thought  of  mary's  spirit,  hidden 
everywhere.  her  heart  a  red  cup  of  fierceness  tucked 
among ordinary things.isn't that what august had said? 
here, everywhere, but hidden. 

"well, how did she finally get out?" 
some things you have to take a deep breath and 
just say. "i went to the hospital where they'd taken her 
to  get  stitches,  and 
i—i  sneaked  her  past  the 
policeman." 

"mother  of  god,"  she  said  for  the  second  time.  

she stood up and walked one loop around the room. 

"i  never  would  have  done  it,  except  t.  ray  said  
the man  who  beat rosaleen was  the meanest hater of 
colored people anywhere, and it would be just like him 
to come back and kill her. i couldn't leave her in there." 

it  was  scary,  my  secrets  spilled  out  across  the 
room, like a garbage truck had  backed up and dumped 
its  sorry  contents  across  the  floor  for  her  to  sort 
through.  but  that  wasn't  what  frightened  me  most.  it 
was the way august leaned back in her chair and looked 
off toward the window with her gaze skimming the top 
of  my  head,  looking  at  nothing  but  the  sticky  air,  her 
thoughts a nerve-racking mystery. 

a fever broke along my neck. 

 

346 

"i  don't  mean  to  be  a  bad  person,"  i  said,  and 
stared at my hands, how they were folded together like 
hands in prayer. "i can't seem to help it." 

you would think i was totally cried out, but tears 
beaded again along my lids. "i do all the wrong things. i 
tell  lies,  all  the  time.  not  to  you.  well,  i  have—but  for  
good reasons. and i hate people. not just t. ray but lots 
of  people.  the  girls  at  school,  and  they  haven't  done 
anything  to  me  except  ignore  me.  i  hate  willifred 
marchant,  the  poet  of  tiburon,  and  i  don't  even  know 
her.  sometimes 
she 
embarrasses  me.  and  when  i  first  came  here,  i  hated 
june." 

i  hate  rosaleen  because 

a flood of silence now. it rose like water; i heard 
a roar in my head, rain in my ears. look at me. put your 
hand back on mine. say something. 

by  now  my  nose  was  running  along  with  my  
eyes.  i  was  sniffling,  wiping  my  cheeks,  unable  to  stop 
my mouth from spewing out every horrible thing i could 
drum up about myself, and once i was finished… well, if 
she could love me then, if she could say, lily, you are still 
a  special  flower  planted  on  the  earth,  then  maybe  i 
would  be  able  to  look  in  the  mirrors  in  her  parlor  and 
see  the  river  glistening  in  my  eyes,  flowing  on  despite 
the things that had died in it. 

 

347 

"but all of  that, that's nothing," i  said. i was  on 
my  feet  needing  to  go  someplace,  but  there  was  no  
place to go. we were on an island. a floating blue island 
in  a  pink  house  where  i  spilled  out  my  guts  and  then 
hoped  i  wasn't  tossed  out  to  sea  to  wait  for  my 
punishment. 

august was looking at me, waiting. i didn't know 

if i could say it. 

"it  was  my  fault  she  died.  i—i  killed  her."  i  
sobbed  and  dropped  straight  down  onto  my  knees  on 
the rug. it was the first time i'd ever said the words to 
another person, and the sound of them broke open my 
heart. 

probably one or two moments in your whole life 
you  will  hear  a  dark  whispering  spirit,  a  voice  coming 
from the center of things. it will have blades for lips and 
will  not stop until  it speaks the one secret thing  at the 
heart  of  it  all.  kneeling  on  the  floor,  unable  to  stop  
shuddering, i heard it plainly. it said, you are unlovable, 
lily owens. unlovable. who could love you? who in this 
world could ever love you? 

i sank farther down, onto my heels, hardly aware 
 am  
of  myself  mumbling  the  words  out  loud.
unlovable."  when  i  looked  up,  i  saw  dust  particles 
floating in the lamplight, august standing, looking down 
at me. i thought she might try to pull me to my feet, but 

 "i

 

348 

instead she knelt beside me and brushed the  hair  back 
from my face. 

"oh, lily," she said. "oh." 
"i accidentally killed  her," i said, staring straight 

into her eyes. 

"listen to me now," said august, tilting my chin 

to her face. 

"that's  a  terrible,  terrible  thing  for  you  to  live 
if  you  did 
with.  but  you're  not  unlovable.  even 
accidentally  kill  her,  you  are  still  the  most  dear,  most 
lovable girl i know. why, rosaleen loves you. may loved 
you. it doesn't take a wizard to see zach loves you. and 
every one of the daughters loves you. and june, despite 
her ways, loves you, too. it just took her a while longer 
because she resented your mother so much." 

"she  resented  my  mother?  but  why?"  i  said, 
realizing that june must have known who i was all along, 
too. 

"oh, it's complicated, just like june. she couldn't 
get over me working as a maid in your mother's house." 
august gave her head a shake. "i know it wasn't fair, but 
she took it out on deborah, and then on you. but even 
june came around to loving you, didn't she?" 

"i guess," i said. 
"mostly, though, i want you to know, i love you. 

just like i loved your mother." 
349 

 

august  stood  up,  but  i  stayed  where  i  was, 
holding her words inside me. "give me your hand," she 
said,  reaching  down.  getting  to  my  feet,  i  felt  dizzy  
around the edges, that feeling like you've stood up too 
fast. 

all this love coming to me. i didn't know what to 
do with it. i wanted to say, i love you, too. i love you all. 
the  feeling  rose  up  in  me  like  a  column  of  wind,  but  
when it got to my mouth, it had no voice, no words. just 
a lot of air and longing. 

"we  both  need  a  little  breather,"  august  said, 

and she plodded toward the kitchen. 

august poured  us glasses  of ice  water from  the 
refrigerator. we took them to the back porch, where we 
sat in the porch swing, taking little gulps of coolness and 
listening to the chains creak. it's surprising how soothing 
that  sound  can be.  we hadn't  bothered  to  turn on  the 
overhead light, and that was soothing, too—just sitting 
in the dark. 

after a few minutes august said, "here's what i 

can't figure out, lily—how you knew to come here." 

i pulled the wooden picture of black mary from 
my  pocket  and  handed  it  to  her.  "it  belonged  to  my  
mother," i said. "i found it in the attic, the same time i 
found her photograph." 

 

350 

"oh, my lord," she said, her hand going up to the 
side of her mouth. "i gave this to your mother not long 
before she died." 

she set her water glass on the floor and walked 
across the porch. i didn't know whether to keep talking, 
so  i  waited  for  her  to  say  something,  and  when  she  
didn't,  i  went  and  stood  beside  her.  she  had  her  lips 
tight  together  and  her  eyes  scanning  the  night.  the 
picture was clutched in her hand, but her hand dangled 
by her side. 

it  took  a  full  minute  for  her  to  pull  it  up  so  we  

could both stare at it. 

"it has "tiburon, s.c." written on the back of it," i 

said. 

august  turned  it  over.  "deborah  must  have 
written  that."  something  close  to  a  smile  passed  over  
her face. "that would've been just like her. she had an 
album  full  of  pictures,  and  she'd  write  on  the  back  of 
every single one of them the place it was taken, even if it 
was her own house." 

she handed me the picture. 
i  stared  at  it,  letting  my  finger  move  across  the  

word "tiburon." 

"who would've thought?" august said. 
we went and sat in the swing, where we rocked 
back  and  forth,  making  little  pushes  on  the  floor  with 

 

351 

our  feet.  she  stared  straight  ahead.  her  slip  strap  had 
fallen down to her elbow, and she didn't even notice. 

june  always  said  that  most  people  bit  off  more  
than  they  could  chew,  but  august  chewed  more  than 
she  bit  off.  june  loved  to  tease  august  about  the  way 
she pondered things, how one minute she was talking to 
you  and  the  next  she  had  slipped  into  a  private  world 
where she turned her thoughts over and over, digesting 
stuff  most  people  would  choke  on.  i  wanted  to  say, 
teach me how to do that. teach me how to take all this 
in. 

thunder rumbled over the trees. i thought of my 
mother's tea parties, tiny sandwiches for a doll's mouth, 
and it washed me in sadness. maybe because i would've 
loved  so  much  to  have  attended  something  like  that. 
maybe  because  all  the  sandwiches  would've  been 
peanut butter, my mother's favorite, and i wasn't even 
that crazy about it. i wondered at the poem august had 
made her learn, whether it had stuck with her after she 
got married. had she lain in her bed listening to t. ray 
snore,  reciting  it  while  she  fell  asleep,  wishing  to  god 
she could run away with robert frost? 

i gave  a sideways glance at  august. i  forced my 
mind  back  to  that  moment  in  her  bedroom  when  i'd 
confessed  the worst  of  human things. upon  hearing it, 
she'd said, i love you. just like i loved your mother. 

 

352 

"all  right  then,"  said  august,  like  we'd  never 
stopped talking. "the picture explains how you came to 
tiburon, but how in the world did you find me?" 

"that  was  easy,"  i  said.  "we  hadn't  been  here 
any  time  before  i spotted  your  black  madonna honey, 
and there was the same picture on it as my mother had. 
the black madonna of breznichar of bohemia." 
"you said that real nice," august told me. 
"i've been practicing." 
"where did you see the honey?" 
"i was in that frogmore stew general store out 
on the edge of town. i asked this man in a bow tie where 
he got it. he's the one who told me where you lived." 

"that would be mr. grady." she shook her head. 
"i swear, it makes me think you were meant to find us." 

i was meant to, i didn't have a doubt about it. i 
just wish i knew where i was meant to end up. i looked 
down at our laps, how both of us had our hands laying 
palm  side  up  on  top  of  our  thighs,  like  we  were  both 
waiting for something to drop in. 

"so  why  don't  we  talk  some  more  about  your 

mother?" she said. 

i  nodded.  every  bone  in  my  body  was  cracking 

with the need to talk about her. 

"anytime  you  need  to  stop  and  take  another 

break, you just tell me." 

 

353 

"all  right,"  i  said.  what  was  coming,  i  couldn't  
imagine.  something  that  required  breaks.  breaks  for 
what? so i could dance for joy? so she could revive me 
after i fainted dead away? or was the idea of breaks so i 
could let the bad news sink all the way in? 

a  dog  started  barking  way  off  in  the  distance. 
august waited for it to stop, then said, "i started working 
for deborah's mother in 1931. deborah was four years 
old. the cutest child, but always into something. i mean, 
a  real  handful.  for  one  thing,  she  used  to  walk  in  her 
sleep.  one  night  she  walked  outside  and  climbed  a 
ladder  the  roofers  had  left  leaning  against  the  house. 
her  sleepwalking  nearly  drove  her  mother  crazy."  she 
laughed. 

"and your mother had an  imaginary  friend. you 
ever had one?" i shook my head. "she called hers tica 
tee. she would talk to her out loud like she was standing 
right there in front of us, and if i forgot to set a place for 
tica tee at the table, deborah would throw a fit. once in 
a while, though, i'd set a place and she'd say, "what are 
you doing? tica tee's not here. she's off starring in the 
movies." your mother loved shirley temple." 

"tica  tee,"  i  said,  wanting  to  feel  that  on  my 

tongue. 

"that  tica  tee  was  something,"  august  said. 
"whatever deborah struggled with, tica tee could do it 

 

354 

perfectly. tica tee made hundreds on her school papers, 
got gold stars in sunday school, made her bed, cleaned 
her  plate.  people  told  your  grand  mother—sarah  was 
her  name—that  she  ought  to  take  deborah  to  this 
doctor  in  richmond  who  specialized  in  children  with 
problems. but i told her, "don't worry about it. she's just 
working  things  out  in  her  own  way.  she'll  grow  out  of 
tica tee in time." and she did." 

where  had  i  been  that  i  didn't  know  about 
imaginary friends? i could see the point of it. how a lost 
part  of  yourself  steps  out  and  reminds  you  who  you 
could be with a little work. 

"it  doesn't  sound  like  me  and  my  mother  were  

anything alike," i said. 

"oh,  but you  were.  she  had a  streak in  her  like 
you do. suddenly she would up and do something other 
girls wouldn't dream of." 

"like what?" 
august  stared  over  my  shoulder  and  smiled. 
"one  time  she  ran  away  from  home.  i  can't  even  
remember what she was upset about. we looked for her 
long past dark. found her curled up in a drainage ditch, 
sound asleep." 

the  dog  had  started  barking  again,  and  august 
grew  quiet.  we  listened  like  it  was  some  kind  of 

 

355 

serenade,  while  i  sat  with  my  eyes  closed,  trying  to  
picture my mother asleep in a ditch. 

after a while i said, "how long did you work for—

my grandmother?" 

"a  good  long  time.  over  nine  years.  until  i  got 
that teaching job i told you about. we still kept up after i 
left, though." 

"i bet they hated it when you moved down here 

to south carolina." 

"poor deborah cried and cried. she was nineteen 

by then, but she cried like she was six." 

the swing had slowed to a stop, and neither one 

of us thought to rev it back up. 

"how did my mother get down here?" 
"i'd  been  here  two  years,"  august  said.  "had 
started  my  honey  business  and  june  was  teaching 
school, when i got a long-distance phone call from her. 
she was crying her eyes out, saying her mother had died. 
"i don't have anybody left but you," she kept saying." 

"what about her father? where was he?" 
"oh,  mr.  fontanel  died when  she  was  a baby.  i 

never even met him." 

"so she moved down here to be with you?" 
"deborah  had  a  friend  from  high  school  who'd 
just moved  to sylvan. she  was  the one  who  convinced 
deborah it was a good place to be. told her there were 

 

356 

jobs and men back from the war. so deborah moved. i 
think  it  was  a  lot  because  of  me,  though.  i  think  she  
wanted me nearby." 

the  dots  were  all  starting  to  connect.  "my  
mother  came  to  sylvan,"  i  said,  "met  t.  ray,  and  got 
married." 

"that's right," august said. 
when  we'd  first  come  out  onto  the  porch,  the 
sky had been  clotted with stars,  the milky way  shining 
like  an actual  road  you could  walk down and  find  your 
mother  standing  at  the  end  of  with  her  hands  on  her 
hips.  but  now  a  damp  fog  rolled  into  the  yard  and  
settled over the porch. a minute later a light rain fell out 
of it. 

i said, "the part i will never figure out is why she 

married him." 

"i  don't  think  your  father  was  always  like  he  is  
now. deborah told me about him. she loved the fact he 
was decorated in the war. he was so brave, she thought. 
said he treated her like a princess." 

i could  have  laughed  in  her  face.  "this  isn't  the 

same terrence ray, i can tell you that right now." 

"you  know,  lily,  people  can  start  out  one  way,  
and by the time life gets through with them they end up 
completely different. i don't doubt he started off loving 
your mother. in fact, i think he worshiped her. and your 

 

357 

mother  soaked  it  up.  like  a  lot  of  young  women,  she 
could  get  carried  away  with  romance.  but  after  six 
months  or  so  it  started  wearing  off.  one  of  her  letters  
talked  about  terrence  ray  having  dirt  under  his 
fingernails, i remember that. next thing i knew she was 
writing me how she didn't know if she could live way out 
on  a  farm,  that  kind  of  thing.  when  he  proposed,  she 
said no." 

"but  she  married  him," 

i  said,  genuinely 

confused. 

"later on she changed her mind and said yes." 
"why?" i said. "if the love had worn off, why did 

she marry him?" 

august cupped her hand on the back of my head 
and  smoothed  my  hair  with  her  fingers.  "i've  thought 
hard  about  whether  i  should  tell  you,  but  maybe  it'll 
help  you  understand  everything  that  happened  a  lot 
better. honey, deborah was pregnant, that's why." 

the instant before she said it, i knew what was 

coming, but still her words fell like a hammer. 

"she was pregnant with me?" my voice sounded 
tired saying the words. my mother's life was too heavy 
for me. 

"that's  right,  pregnant  with  you.  she  and 
terrence  ray  got  married  around  christmastime.  she 
called long distance to  tell me." unwanted, i thought. i 

 

358 

was  an  unwanted  baby.  not  only  that, my  mother  had 
gotten stuck with t. ray because of me. i was glad it was 
dark, so august couldn't see my face, how bent in it was. 
you think you want to know something, and then once 
you  do,  all  you  can  think  about  is  erasing  it  from  your  
mind.  from  now  on  when  people  asked  me  what  i 
wanted  to  be  when  i  grew  up,  i  planned  to  say, 
amnesiac. 

i  listened  to  the  hiss  of  rain.  the  spray  floated  
over  and  misted  my  cheeks  while  i  counted  on  my  
fingers.  "i  was  born  seven  months  after  they  got 
married." 

"she  called  me  right  after  you  were  born.  she  

said you were so pretty it hurt her eyes to look at you." 

something  about  this  caused  my  own  eyes  to 
sting like sand had flown into them. maybe my mother 
had  cooed  over  me  after  all.  made  embarrassing  baby 
talk.  twirled  my  newborn  hair  like  the  top  of  an  ice  
cream cone. done it up with pink bows. just because she 
didn't  plan on having  me didn't mean she hadn't loved 
me. 

august  went on talking while i  leaned back into 
the familiar story i'd always told myself, the one about 
my mother loving me beyond reason. i'd lived inside it 
the way a goldfish lives in its bowl, as if that was the only 
world there was. leaving it would be the death of me. 

 

359 

i sat there with my shoulders slumped, staring at 

the floor. i would not think the word "unwanted." 

"are you all right?" august said. "you want to go 
to bed now and sleep on all this, talk about the rest in 
the morning?" 

"no"  burst  out  of  my  lips.  i  took  a  breath.  "i'm  
fine, really," i said, trying to sound unruffled. "i just need 
some more water." 

she  took  my  empty  glass  and  went  to  the  
kitchen,  looking  back  twice  at  me.  when  she  returned 
with the water, she had a red umbrella hooked over her 
wrist.  "in  a  little  while  i'll  walk  you  over  to  the  honey  
house," she said. 

as  i drank,  the  glass shook  in  my  hand  and  the 
water would hardly go down. the sound of swallowing in 
my throat grew so loud it blotted out the rain for several 
seconds. 

"are you sure you don't want to go to bed now?" 

august asked. 

"i'm sure. i need to know—" 
"you need to know what, lily?" 
"everything," i said. 
august  settled  herself  beside  me  on  the  swing, 

resigned. "all right then," she said. "all right." 

"i know she only married him because of me, but 

do you think she was just a little bit happy?" i asked. 

 

360 

"i  think  for  a  while  she  was.  she  tried,  i  know  
that. i got a dozen or so letters and at least that many 
phone calls from her, spread out over the first couple of 
years, and i could see she was making an effort. mostly 
she  wrote  about  you,  how  you  were  sitting  up,  taking 
your first steps, playing patty-cake. but then her letters 
came  less  and  less  often,  and  when  they  did  come,  i  
could tell she was unhappy. one day she called me up. it 
was  the  end  of  august  or  first  of  september—i 
remember because we'd had mary day not long before 
that. 

"she said she was leaving t. ray, that she had to 
leave home. she wanted to know if she could stay with 
us here for a few  months till she figured out where to 
go. of course, i said, that would be fine. when i picked 
her  up  at  the  bus  station,  she  didn't  even  look  like 
herself.  she  had  gotten  so  thin  and  had  these  dark 
circles under her eyes." 

my stomach did a slow roll. i knew we'd come to 
the  place  in  the  story  i  feared  the  most.  i  began  to  
breathe very fast. "i was with her when you picked her 
up  at  the  bus  station.  she  brought  me  along,  didn't 
she?" 

august  leaned  over  and  whispered  against  my 

hair. "no, honey, she came by herself." 

 

361 

i realized i'd bitten the skin inside my cheek. the 
taste of blood made me want to spit, but i swallowed it 
instead. "why?" i said. "why didn't she bring me?" 

"all i know, lily, is that she was depressed, kind 
of falling apart. the day she left home, nothing unusual 
happened. she just woke up and decided she couldn't be 
there anymore. she called a lady from the next farm to 
baby-sit, and she drove terrence ray's truck to the bus 
station.  up  until  she  got  here,  i  thought  she'd  be 
bringing you with her." 

the  swing  groaned  while  we  sat  there  smelling 
warm rain, wet wood, rotted grass. my mother had left 
me. 

"i  hate  her,"  i  said.  i  meant  to  shout  it,  but  it  
came out unnaturally calm, low and raspy like the sound 
of cars crunching slowly over gravel. 

"now, hold on, lily." 
"i  do,  i  hate  her.  she  wasn't  anything  like  i  

thought she was." 

i'd  spent  my  life  imagining  all  the  ways  she'd 
loved me, what a perfect specimen of a mother she was. 
and all of it was lies. i had completely made her up. 

"it  was  easy  for  her  to  leave  me,  because  she  

never wanted me in the first place," i said. 

august reached for me, but i got to my feet and 
pushed open the screen door leading to the porch steps. 

 

362 

i  let  it  slam  behind  me,  then  sat  on  the  rain-sopped 
steps, hunched up under the eave. i heard august move 
across the porch, felt the air thicken as she stood behind 
me on the other side of the screen. 

"i'm  not  making  to  make  excuses  for  her,  lily," 

she said. "your mother did what she did." 

"some  mother,"  i  said.  i  felt  hard  inside.  hard 

and angry. 

"will you listen to me for a minute? when your 
mother got here to tiburon, she was practically skin and 
bone. may couldn't get her to eat a thing. all she did was 
cry  for  a  week.  later  on  we  called  it  a  nervous  
breakdown, but while it was happening we didn't know 
what to call it. i took her to the doctor here, and he gave 
her some cod liver oil and asked where her white family 
was. he said maybe she needed to spend some time on 
bull street. so i didn't take her back to him again." 

"bull  street.  the  mental  institution?"  the  story 
was  getting  worse  by  the  minute.  "but  that's  for  crazy  
people," i said. 

"i guess he didn't know what else to do for her, 
but she wasn't crazy. she was depressed, but not crazy." 
"you  should've  let  him  put  her  in  there.  i  wish 

she'd rotted in there." 

"lily!" 
i'd shocked her, and i was glad. 

363 

 

my  mother  had  been  looking  for  love,  and 
instead she'd found t. ray and the farm, and then me, 
and i had not been enough for her. she'd left me with t. 
ray owens. 

the sky was split by a zigzagged path of lightning, 
but even then i didn't move. my hair blew like smoke in 
every  direction.  i  felt  my  eyes  harden,  grow  flat  and 
narrow as pennies. i stared at a dollop of bird shit on the 
bottom step, the way the rain was smearing it into the 
crevices of the wood. 

"are you listening now?" august said. her voice 
sifted  through  the  screen,  little  barbed-wire  tips  on 
every word. "are you?" 

"i hear you." 
"depressed  people  do  things  they  wouldn't 

ordinarily do." 

"like  what?"  i said.  "abandon  their  children?"  i 
couldn't  stop.  the  rain  spattered  my  sandals,  dripped 
between my toes. 

letting out a loud breath, august walked back to 
the swing and sat down. it  seemed  like  maybe  i'd  hurt 
her,  disappointed  her,  and  something  about  that 
punched a hole in me. some of my pridefulness drained 
out. 

i eased off the steps and went back inside, onto 
the  screened  porch.  as  i  sat  down  beside  her  on  the 

 

364 

swing, she laid her hand on mine, and the heat flowed 
out from her palm into my skin. 

i shuddered. 
"come here," she said, pulling me over to her. it 
was like being swept under a bird's wing, and that's how 
we  stayed  for  a  while,  rocking  back  and  forth  with  me  
tucked under there. 

"what made her so depressed like that?" i said. 
"i  don't  know  the  whole  answer,  but  part  of  it  
was  her  being  out  on  the  farm,  isolated  from  things, 
married to a  man she really didn't want to be married 
to." 

the rain picked up, coming down in large, silver-
black sheets. i tried, but i couldn't make heads or tails of 
my heart. one minute i hated my mother, the next i felt 
sorry for her. 

"okay, she was having a nervous breakdown, but 

how could she leave me behind like that?" i said. 

"after  she'd  been  here  three  months  and  was 
feeling  a  little  better,  she  started  talking  about  how 
much she missed you. finally she went back to sylvan to 
get you." 

i sat up and looked at august, hearing the quick 
suck of air through my lips. "she came back to get me?" 
"she  planned  to  bring  you  here  to  tiburon  to 
live.  she  even  talked  to  clayton  about  filing  divorce 

 

365 

papers. the last time i saw her, she was on a bus waving 
at me through the window." 

i leaned my head on august's shoulder and knew 
exactly what had happened next. i closed my eyes, and 
there  it  was.  the  long-gone  day  that  would  never 
leave—the  suitcase  on  the  floor,  how  she'd  tossed 
clothes into it without folding them. 

hurry, she'd kept saying. 
t. ray had told me she came back for her things. 
but she'd come back for me, too. she'd wanted to bring 
me here, to tiburon, to august's. 

if only we'd made it. i remembered the sound of 
t. ray's boots on the stairs. i wanted to pound my fists 
against something, to scream at my mother for getting 
caught, for not packing faster, for not coming sooner. 

at last i looked up at august. when i spoke, my 
mouth  tasted  bitter.  "i  remember  it.  i  remember  her 
coming back for me." 

"i wondered about that," she said. 
"t. ray found her packing. they were yelling and 
fighting.  she—"  i  stopped,  hearing  their  voices  in  my 
head. 

"go on," august said. 
i

 looked  down  at  my  hands.

 they  were  

trembling.  "she  grabbed  a  gun  from  inside  the  closet, 
but he took it away from her. it happened so fast it gets 

 

366 

mixed up in my brain. i saw the gun on the floor, and i 
picked it up. i don't know why i did that. i—i wanted to 
help. to give it back to her. why did i do that? why did i 
pick it up?" 

august  slid  out  to  the  edge  of  the  swing  and 
turned  to  face  me.  her  eyes  were  determined-looking. 
"do  you  remember  what  happened  next,  after  you 
picked it up?" 

i shook my head. "only the noise. the explosion. 
so  loud."  the  chains  on  the  swing  twitched.  i  looked 
over and saw august frowning. 

"how  did  you  find  out  about—my  mother 

dying?" i said. 

"when deborah didn't come back like she said… 
well,  i  had  to  know  what  happened,  so  i  called  your 
house. a woman answered, said she was a neighbor." 

"a neighbor of ours told you?" i asked. "she said 
deborah  had  been  killed  in  an  accident  with  a  gun. 
that's all she would say." 

i turned and looked out at the night, at dripping 
tree limbs, at shadows moving on the half-lit porch. "you 
didn't know that i was the one who—who did it?" 

"no,  i  never  imagined  such  a  thing,"  she  said. 
"i'm not sure i can imagine it now." she laced her fingers 
together, then laid them in her lap. "i tried to find out 
more.  i called back  again,  and terrence  ray  answered, 

 

367 

but he wouldn't talk about it. he kept wanting to know 
who i was. i even called the police station in sylvan, but 
they wouldn't give out any information either, just said it 
was  an  accidental  death.  so  i've  had  to  live  with  not  
knowing. all these years." 

we  sat  in  the  stillness.  the  rain  had  nearly 
stopped, leaving us with all this quiet and a sky with no 
moon. 

"come on," august said. "let's get you in bed." 
we walked into the night, into the blurring song 
of katydids, the thud-splat of raindrops on the umbrella, 
all those terrible rhythms that take up inside when you 
let your guard down. left you, they drummed. left you. 
left you. 

knowing  can  be  a  curse  on  a  person's  life.  i'd  
traded in a pack of lies for a pack of truth, and i didn't 
know which one was heavier. 

which  one  took  the  most  strength  to  carry  
around?  it  was  a  ridiculous  question,  though,  because 
once  you  know  the  truth,  you  can't  ever  go  back  and 
pick up your suitcase of lies. heavier or not, the truth is 
yours now. 

in the honey house, august waited till i crawled 
under  the  sheets,  then  bent  over  and  kissed  my 
forehead. 

 

368 

"every  person  on  the  face  of  the  earth  makes 
mistakes, lily. every last one. we're all so human. your 
mother made a terrible mistake, but she tried to fix it." 

"good night," i said, and rolled onto my side. 
"there is nothing perfect," august said from the 

doorway. "there is only life." 
 

 

 

369 

chapter thirteen 

a  worker  [bee]  is  just  over  a  centimeter 
long  and  weighs  only  about  sixty  milligrams; 
nevertheless, she can fly with a load heavier than 
herself. 

—the honey bee 
 
sweat collected in the creases of  my elbows, in 
the  soft  places  behind  my  knees.  lying  on  top  of  the 
sheets,  i  touched  my  eyelids.  i'd  cried  so  much  they 
were puffed out and half shut. if it hadn't been for my 
eyelids, i might not have believed any of the things that 
had passed between me and august. 

i hadn't  moved  since august  left, only  lay  there 
staring  at  the  flat  surface  of  the  wall,  at  the  array  of 
night  bugs  that  wander  out  and  crawl  around  for  fun 
after  they  think  you're  asleep.  when  i  grew  tired  of 
watching them, i placed my arm across my eyes and told 
myself, sleep, lily. please, just go to sleep. but of course, 
i couldn't. 

 

370 

i  sat  up,  feeling  like  my  body  weighed  two  
hundred pounds. like somebody had backed the cement 
truck up to the honey house, swung the pipe over to my 
chest, and started pouring. i hated feeling like a concrete 
block in the middle of the night. more than once, while 
staring at the wall, i'd thought of our lady. i wanted to 
talk to her, to say, where do i go from here? but when 
i'd seen her earlier, when august and i had first come in, 
she didn't look like she could be of service to anybody, 
bound up with all that chain around her.  you want the 
one you're praying to at least to look capable. 

i dragged myself out of bed and went to see her 
anyway.  i  decided  that  even  mary  did  not  need  to  be 
one hundred percent capable all the time. the only thing 
i  wanted  was  for  her  to  understand.  somebody  to  let 
out a big sigh and say, you poor thing, i know how you 
feel? given a choice, i preferred someone to understand 
my  situation,  even  though  she  was  helpless  to  fix  it, 
rather than the other way around. but that's just me. 

right off i smelled the chain, its thick, rusty odor. 
i had the urge to unwrap her, but of course that would 
have  ruined  the  whole  reenactment  august  and  the 
daughters had going. 

the red candle flickered at mary's feet. i plopped 
onto  the  floor  and  sat  cross-legged  in  front  of  her. 
outside, i heard wind high in the trees, a singsong voice 

 

371 

that  carried  me  back  to  long  ago  times  when  i  would  
wake in the night to the same sound and, muddled with 
sleep and wanting, would imagine it was my mother out 
there among the trees, singing her bottomless love. 

once  i  flew  into  t.  ray's  room,  yelling  she  was  
outside  my  window.  he  said  three  words:  "holy  crap, 
lily." 

i hated when he was right. there had never been 
any voice in the wind. no mother out there singing. no 
bottomless  love.  the  terrible  thing,  the  really  terrible 
thing,  was  the anger  in  me. it  had  started on  the  back 
porch when the story of my mother had collapsed, like 
the ground under my feet giving way. i didn't want to be 
angry.  i  told  myself,  you're  not  angry.  you  don't  have 
any right to be angry. what you did to your mother is a 
lot  worse  than  what  she  did  to  you.  but  you  can't  talk  
yourself out of anger. either you are angry or you're not. 
the room was hot and still. in another minute i 
would not be able to breathe for the anger filling me up. 
my lungs went out only so far before they struck against 
it and closed back in. 

i  got  to  my  feet  and  paced  in  the  darkness.  
behind  me  on  the  worktable  a  half  dozen  jars  of  black  
madonna  honey  waited  for  zach  to  deliver  them 
somewhere 
in  town—to  clayton's  maybe,  to  the 

 

372 

frogmore  stew  general  store,  the  amen  dollar,  or 
divine do's, the colored beauty parlor. 

how  dare  she?  how  dare  she  leave  me?  i  was  

her child. 

i looked  toward the  window, wanting  to smash 
the panes out of it. i wanted to throw something all the 
way  to  heaven  and  knock  god  clean  off  his  throne.  i  
picked up one of the honey jars and hurled it as hard as i 
could.  it  missed  black  mary's  head  by  inches  and 
smashed against the back wall. i picked up another one 
and threw it, too. it crashed on the floor beside a stack 
of supers. i threw every last jar on the table, until honey 
was  spattered  everywhere,  flung  like  cake  batter  from 
electric beaters. i stood in a gooey room full of broken 
glass,  and  i  didn't  care.  my  mother  had  left  me.  who  
cared about honey on the walls? 

i  grabbed  a  tin  bucket  next  and,  letting  out  a  
grunt, threw it with so much force it left a dent in the 
wall. my throwing arm was nearly worn out, but i picked 
up a tray of candle molds and flung that, too. 

then i stood still, watching the honey slide along 
the  wall  toward  the  floor.  a  trickle  of  bright  blood 
wound down my left arm. i had no idea how it'd gotten 
there.  my  heart  beat  wildly.  i  felt  like  i'd  unzipped  my  
skin and momentarily stepped out of it, leaving a crazy 
person in charge. 

 

373 

the  room  turned  like  a  carousel,  with  my  
stomach gliding up and down. i felt a need to touch the 
wall with both hands to make it still again. i walked back 
toward  the  table  where  the  honey  jars  had  been  and 
braced my hands against it. i couldn't think what to do. i 
felt a powerful sadness, not because of what i'd done, as 
bad  as  that  was,  but  because  everything  seemed 
emptied out—the feelings i'd had for her, the things i'd 
believed, all those stories about her i'd lived off of like 
they were food and water and air. because i was the girl 
she'd left behind. that's what it came down to. looking 
around at the wreck i'd made, i wondered if someone in 
the pink house might have heard the honey jars hit the 
wall. i went to the window and stared across the gloom 
in the yard. 

the  panes  in  august's  bedroom  window  were 
dark. i felt my heart in my chest. it hurt so badly. like it 
had been stepped on. 

"how come you left me?" i whispered, watching 

my breath make a circle of fog on the glass. 

i stayed pressed against the window for a while, 
then went and cleared off a few pieces of glass from the 
floor in front of our lady. i lay down on my side, drawing 
my  knees  toward  my  chin.  above  me,  black  mary  was  
flecked with honey and seemed not at all surprised. i lay 
in  the  emptiness,  in  the  tiredness,  with  every  thing—

 

374 

even  the  hating—comdrained  out.  there  was  nothing 
left  to  do.  no  place  to  go.  just  right  here,  right  now,  
where the truth was. 

i told myself not to get up in the night and walk 
across  the  floor  unless  i  wanted  to  cut  my  feet  to 
smithereens. then i closed my eyes and began to piece 
together  the  dream  i  wanted  myself  to  h.  how  a  little  
door in the black mary statue would open up, just over 
her  abdomen,  and  i  would  crawl  inside  to  a  hidden 
room. this was not all my imagination, as i had glimpsed 
an  actual  picture  of  this  in  august's  book—a  statue  of  
mary  with  a  wide-open  door  and,  inside,  all  these 
people tucked away in the secret world of consolation. 

• • • 
i  woke  to rosaleen's  big  hands  shaking  me  and 
opened  my  eyes  to  a  terrible  brightness.  her  face  was 
bent  over  mine,  the  scent  of  coffee  and  grape  jelly 
coming from her mouth. "lily!" she yelled. "what in the 
sam hill happened in here?" 

i'd  forgotten  there  would  be  dried  blood  caked 
across my arm. i looked at it, at a piece of glass, small as 
a  stub  of  diamond,  burrowed  in  a  puckered  setting  of 
skin.  around  me,  jagged  pieces  of  jars  and  puddles  of 
honey. blood dotted the floor. 

rosaleen  stared  at  me,  waiting,  bewildered-
looking. i stared back, trying to make her face come into 

 

375 

focus.  sunlight  slanted  across  our  lady  and  fell  down 
around us. 

"answer me," rosaleen said. 
i squinted in the light. my mouth couldn't seem 

to open up and speak. 

"look at you. you've been bleeding." 
my head nodded, bobbed around on my neck. i 
i  felt  embarrassed, 

looked  at  the  wrecked  room. 
ridiculous, stupid. 

"i—i threw some jars of honey." 
"you made this mess?" she said, like she couldn't 
quite believe it, like what she'd expected me to say was 
that a roving band of house wreckers had come through 
during the night. she blew a puff of air over her face, so 
forceful  it  lifted  her  hair,  which  was  not  easy  to  do 
considering the amount of lacquer she kept smeared on 
it. "lord god in heaven," she said. 

i got to my feet, waiting for her to bawl me out, 
but she took her thick fingers and struggled to pluck the 
piece of glass from my arm. 

"you need some mercurochrome on this before 
you get infected," she told me. "come on." she sounded 
exasperated, 
like  she  wanted  to  take  me  by  the 
shoulders and shake me till my teeth fell out. 

i  sat  on  the  side  of  the  tub  while  rosaleen 
dabbed my arm with a stinging icy swab. she plastered a 

 

376 

band-aid across it and said, "there, you won't die from 
blood poisoning at least." 

she  closed  the  medicine  cabinet  over  the  sink, 
then shut the bathroom door. i watched her take a seat 
on the commode, how her belly dropped down between 
her legs. when rosaleen sat on a toilet, the whole thing 
disappeared under her. i perched on the side of the tub 
and thought how glad i was august and june were still in 
their rooms. 

"all right," she said, "why did you throw all that 

honey?" 

i looked at  the row of  seashells on  the window 
ledge,  knowing  how  truly  they  belonged  here  even 
though  we  were  a  hundred  miles  from  the  ocean. 
august  had  said  everybody  needed  a  seashell  in  her 
bathroom  to  remind  her  the  ocean  was  her  home. 
seashells, she'd said, are our lady's favorite items, next 
to the moon. 

i  went  over  and  picked  up  one  of  the  shells,  a  

pretty white one, flat with yellow around the edges. 

rosaleen  sat  there  watching  me.  "any  time  
now,"  she  said.  "t.  ray  was  right  about  my  mother,"  i 
said,  hearing  myself say  the words,  feeling sickened  by 
them. "she left me. it was just like he said it was. she left 
me."  for  a  second  the  anger  i'd  felt  the  night  before  
flared  up,  and  it  crossed  my  mind  to  slam  the  shell 

 

377 

against  the  tub,  but  i  took  a  breath  instead.  throwing  
fits wasn't that satisfying, i'd found out. 

rosaleen  shifted  her  weight,  and  the  toilet  lid 
squeaked and slid around on top of the seat. she raked 
her fingers over the top of her head. i looked away, at 
the  pipe  under  the  sink,  at  a  smudge  of  rust  on  the 
linoleum. 

"so  your  mother  did  leave  after  all,"  she  said. 

"lord, i was afraid of that." 

i  lifted  my  head.  i  remembered  that  first  night 
after  we  ran  away,  down  by  the  creek,  when  i'd  told  
rosaleen what t. ray had said. i'd wanted her to laugh 
at  the  very  idea  of  my  mother  leaving  me,  but  she'd  
hesitated. 

"you knew already, didn't you?" i said. 
"i  didn't  know  for  sure,"  she  said.  "i  just  heard 

things." 

"what things?" 
she let out a sigh, really something more than a 
sigh. "after your mama died," she said, "i heard t. ray 
on the phone talking to that neighbor lady, mrs. watson. 
he was telling her he didn't need her to watch after you, 
that he'd gotten  one of the  pickers out of the orchard. 
he  was  talking  about  me,  so  i  listened."  outside  the  
window  a  crow  flew  past,  filling  the  bathroom  with  a 

 

378 

frantic caw-caw, and rosaleen stopped, waiting for it to 
die down. 

i  knew  mrs.  watson  from  church,  from  all  the  
times  she  stopped  to  buy  peaches  from  me.  she  was 
kind as she could be, but she'd always looked at me like 
there  was  something  indescribably  sad  written  across 
my forehead, like she wanted to come over and scrub it 
off. 

i clutched  the  side  of  the  tub as  rosaleen went 
on,  not  sure  i  wanted  her  to.  "i  heard  your  daddy  tell 
mrs. watson, "janie, you've done more than your share, 
looking after lily these past months. i don't know what 
we would've done without you."" 

rosaleen  looked  at  me  and  shook  her  head.  "i 
always wondered what he meant by that. when you told 
me  what  t.  ray  said  about  your  mother  leaving  you,  i 
guess i knew then." 

"i  can't  believe  you  didn't  tell  me,"  i  said  and 

folded my arms across my chest. 

"so how did you find out?" rosaleen asked. 
"august  told  me,"  i  said.  i  thought  of  all  that 
crying  i'd  done  in  her  bedroom.  holding  fistfuls  of  her 
dress in my hand. the monogram on her handkerchief, 
scratchy against my cheek. 

 

379 

"august?"  rosaleen  repeated.  you  don't  see 
rosaleen  looking  dumbfounded  that  often,  but  that's 
the look she had now. 

"she knew my mother back when she was a little 

girl in virginia," i explained. "august helped raise her." 

i waited a few seconds, letting it soak in. 
"this  is  where  my  mother  came  when  she  left. 
when… mrs. watson took care of me," i said. "she came 
right here to this house." 

rosaleen's  eyes  grew  even  narrower,  if  such  a 

thing was possible. 

"your mother—" she said, then stopped. i could 
see that her brain was struggling to fit it all together. my 
mother leaving. mrs. watson watching me.  my mother 
returning, only to get killed. 

"my  mother  stayed  here  three  months  before 
she  went  back  to  sylvan,"  i  said.  "i  guess  one  day  it  
finally dawned on her: oh, yeah, that's right, i've got a 
little  girl  at home. gee,  maybe  i'll go  back and  get her 
now." 

i heard the bitter tone in my voice, and it came 
to me how i could lock that tone into my voice forever. 
from  now  on,  every  time  i  thought  of  my  mother,  i  
could, so easy, slip off into a cold place where meanness 
took  over.  i  squeezed  the  shell  and  felt  it  dig  into  the 
pad of skin on my palm. 

 

380 

rosaleen  got  to  her  feet.  i  looked  at  her,  how  
large she was in the little bathroom. i stood up, too, and 
for a second we were sandwiched together between the 
tub and the toilet, staring at each other. 

"i wish you'd told me what you knew about my 

mother," i said. "how come you didn't?" 

"oh, lily," she said, and there was gentleness in 
her words, like they'd been rocked in a little hammock of 
tenderness  down  in  her  throat.  "why  would  i  go  and 
hurt you with something like that?" 

rosaleen walked beside me to the honey house 
with a mop flung over her shoulder and a spatula in her 
hand. i carried a bucket of rags and the spic and span. 
we  used  the  spatula  to  scrape  honey  off  places  you 
wouldn't believe. some of it had gotten all the way over 
onto august's adding machine. 

we wiped off the floors and the walls, then went 
to work on our lady. we picked the place up and turned 
it  back  the  way  it  was,  and  the  entire  time  we  didn't  
speak a word. 

i  worked  with  heaviness  inside,  with  my  spirit 
emptied out. there was my breath curling in hard puffs 
from  my  nostrils.  there  was  rosaleen's  heart  so  full 
toward  me  it  broke  through  into  her  sweating  face.  
there was our lady talking with her eyes, saying things i 
could not make out. and there was nothing else. 

 

381 

• • • 
the daughters and otis arrived at noon, lugging 
in  all  manner  of  potluck  dishes,  as  if  we  hadn't  eaten 
ourselves sick the night before. 

they  tucked  them  into  the  oven  to  keep  warm 
and  stood  around  in  the  kitchen  sneaking  bites  of 
rosaleen's  corn  fritters,  saying  they  were  the  finest 
fritters  they'd  ever  had  the  pleasure  of  eating,  which 
caused rosaleen to swell up with pride. 

"y'all stop eating up all rosaleen's fritters," june 

said. "they're for our lunch." 

"oh, let  "em eat,"  said  rosaleen, which  floored 
me, since she'd been known to smack my hand sideways 
for pinching a single crumb off her fritters before dinner. 
by  the  time  neil  and  zach  arrived,  the  fritters  were 
nearly gone, and rosaleen was in danger of floating off 
into the atmosphere. 

i stood numb and plaster stiff in the corner of the 
kitchen.  i  wanted  to  crawl  on  my  knees  back  to  the  
honey house and ball up in the bed. i wanted everybody 
to shut up and go home. 

zach started toward me, but i turned away and 
stared down the sink drain. from the corner of my eye i 
grew  aware  of  august  watching  me.  her  mouth  was 
bright  and  shiny,  like  she'd  rubbed  on  vaseline,  so  i 
knew  she'd  been  dipping  into  the  fritters,  too.  she 

 

382 

walked over and touched her hand to my cheek. i didn't 
think  august  knew  about  me  turning  the  honey  house 
into a disaster zone, but she had a way of figuring things 
out. maybe she was letting me know it was okay. 

"i  want  you  to  tell  zach,"  i  said.  "about  me  

running away, about my mother, about everything." 

"don't you want to tell him yourself?" 
my eyes started to fill up. "i can't. please, you do 

it." 

she  glanced  in  his  direction.  "all  right  then.  i'll 

tell him the first chance i get." 

she led the group outside for the last of the mary 

day ceremony. 

we paraded into the backyard, all the daughters 
with  tiny smudges  of grease clinging  to their  lips.  june 
was  out  there  waiting  for  us,  sitting  in  an  armless  
kitchen chair, playing her cello. we gathered around her 
while the lights of noontime bore down. 

the  music  she  played  was  the  kind  that  sawed 
through  you,  cutting  into  the  secret  chambers  of  your 
heart and setting the sadness free. listening to it, i could 
see my mother sitting on a trailways bus, riding out of 
sylvan, while my  four-year-old self napped on the bed, 
not yet knowing what i would wake to. 

 

383 

june's  music  turned  into  air,  and  the  air  into 
aching. i swayed on my feet and tried not to breathe it 
in. 

• • • 
it was a relief when neil and zach stepped out of 
the honey  house  carrying our lady; it  got my mind off 
the trailways bus. they carried her under their arms like 
a tube of carpet, with the chains slapping back and forth 
against her body. you'd think they would use the wagon 
again, something a little more dignified than this. and if 
that wasn't bad enough, when they set her down, they 
deposited her in the middle of an anthill, which started 
an ant stampede. we had to jump around, shaking them 
off our feet. sugar-girl's wig, which for some reason she 
insisted on calling a "wig hat," had slid down toward her 
eyebrows from the jumping around, so we had to have 
time  out  for  her  to  go  inside  and  adjust  it.  otis  yelled 
after her, "i told you not to wear that thing, it's too hot 
for  a  wig.  it's  sliding  around  on  your  head  from  the 
perspiration." 

"if i wanna wear my wig hat, i'm gonna wear it," 

she said over her shoulder. 

"don't we know it," he snapped back, looking at 
us like we were all on his side, when really were backing 
sugar-girl  one  hundred  percent.  not  because  we  liked 

 

384 

her wig—it was the worst-looking thing you ever saw—
we just didn't like otis giving her orders. 

when all  that  finally  settled  down,  august  said, 

"well, here we are, and here's our lady." 

i looked her over, proud of how clean she was. 
august  read  mary's words from  the bible:  "'for 
behold  from  henceforth  all  generations  shall  call  me 
blessed—"'" 

"blessed mary," violet interrupted. 
"blessed, blessed mary." 
she  stared  at  the  sky,  and  we  all  looked  up,  
wondering  if  she'd  caught  a  glimpse  of  mary  climbing 
through the clouds. "blessed mary," she said one more 
time. 

"today  we're  celebrating  the  assumption  of 
mary,"  august  said.  "we're  celebrating  how  she  woke 
from her sleep and rose into heaven. and we're here to 
remember  the  story  of  our  lady  of  chains,  to  remind 
ourselves that those chains could never keep her down. 
our lady broke free of them every time." 

august  grabbed  hold  of  the  chain  around  black 
mary  and  unwrapped  a  loop  before  handing  it  off  to 
sugar-girl, who unwrapped it a little further. every one 
of  us  got  to  join  in  taking  off  a  loop  of  chain.  what  i  
remember is the clinking noise it made as it uncoiled in a 

 

385 

pile at mary's feet, the sounds seeming to pick up where 
violet left off. blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed. 

is 

"mary 

rising,"  said  august,  her  voice 
concentrated  into  a  whisper.  "she  is  rising  to  her 
heights." the daughters lifted their arms. even otis had 
his arms shot straight up in the air. 

"our  mother  mary  will  not  be  cast  down  and 
bound up," said august. "and neither will her daughters. 
we will rise, daughters. we… will… rise." 

june  sliced  her  bow  across  the  cello  strings.  i 
wanted to lift my arms with the rest of them, to hear a 
voice coming to me out of the sky, saying, you will rise, 
to  feel  that  it  was  possible,  but  they  hung  limp  by  my  
sides. inside, i felt small and contemptible, abandoned. 

every  time  i  closed  my  eyes,  i  still  saw  the  

trailways bus. 

the  daughters  stayed  with  their  arms  reaching 
into the air, giving off the feeling they were rising with 
mary.  then  august  picked  up  a  jar  of  black  madonna 
honey from behind june's chair, and what she did with it 
brought  everybody  back  to  earth.  she  opened  the  lid 
and turned it upside down over our lady's head. 

honey  oozed  down  mary's  face,  across  her 
shoulders, sliding down the folds of her dress. a wedge 
of honeycomb stuck in the crook of our lady's elbow. 

 

386 

i looked at rosaleen as if to say, well, great, we 
spent all that time cleaning honey off her, and here they 
go putting it back on. 

i  decided  nothing  these  women  did  would  ever 
surprise  me  again,  but  that  lasted  about  one  second, 
because next the daughters swarmed around our  lady 
like a circle of bee attendants and rubbed the honey into 
the wood, working it into the top of her head, into her 
cheeks,  her  neck  and  shoulders  and  arms,  across  her 
breasts, her belly. 

"come  on,  lily,  and  help  us,"  said  mabelee. 
rosaleen had already dived in and was coating honey all 
over our lady's thighs. 

i  hung  back,  but  cressie  took  my  hands  and 
dragged  me  over  to  mary,  slapped  them  down  in  the 
muck of sun-warmed honey, right on top of our lady's 
red heart. 

i  remembered  how  i'd  visited  our  lady  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  how  i'd  placed  my  hand  on  that 
same spot. you are my mother, i'd told her then. you are 
the mother of thousands. 

"i don't get why we're doing this," i said. 
"we  always  bathe  her  in  honey,"  said  cressie.  

"every year." 

"but how come?" 

 

387 

august  was  working  the  honey  into  our  lady's 
face.  "the  churches used to  bathe their special  statues 
in  holy  water  as  a  way  to  honor  them,"  she  said.  
"especially statues of our lady. sometimes they bathed 
her in wine. we settled on honey." 

august  moved  down  to  our  lady's  neck.  "see, 
lily,  honey  is  a  preservative.  it  seals  over  the  comb  in  
the  hives  to  keep  it  safe  and  pure  so  the  bees  can  
survive  the  winter.  when  we  bathe  our  lady  in  it,  i 
guess you'd say we're preserving her for another year, at 
least inside our hearts we're doing that." 

"i didn't know honey was a preservative," i said, 
starting to like the feel of it under my fingers, how they 
glided as if oiled. 

"well, people don't think about honey like that, 
but it's so strong-acting people used to smear it on dead 
bodies  to  embalm  them.  mothers  buried  their  dead 
babies in it, and it would keep them fresh." 

this  was  a  use  for  honey  i  hadn't  considered.  i  
could just see funeral homes selling big jars of honey for 
dead people, instead of coffins. i tried to picture that in 
the drive-through window at the funeral home. 

i began to work my hands into the wood, almost 

embarrassed at the intimacy of what we were doing. 

once mabelee leaned her head over too far and 
got honey all in her hair, but it was lunelle who took the 

 

388 

cake with honey dripping off the ends of her elbows. she 
kept  trying  to  lick  it  off,  but  of  course  her  tongue  
couldn't reach that far. 

the ants started a single-file parade up the side 
of  our  lady,  drawn  by  the  honey,  and  not  to  be 
outdone, a handful of scout bees showed up and landed 
on our lady's head. let somebody bring out the honey 
and the insect kingdom will be there in no time. 

queenie said, "next i guess the honey bears will 

be joining us." 

i  actually  laughed  and,  spotting  a  honey-free 
place  near  the  base  of  the  statue,  worked  to  get  it  
covered up. 

our lady was covered with hands, every shade of 
brown and black, going in their own directions, but then 
the strangest thing started happening. gradually all our 
hands fell into the same movement, sliding up and down 
the  statue  in  long,  slow  strokes,  then  changing  to  a 
sideways motion, like a flock of birds that shifts direction 
in  the  sky  at  the  same  moment,  and  you're  left  
wondering who gave the order. 

this went on for i don't know how long, and we 
didn't ruin  it  by talking.  we were preserving  our lady, 
and  i  was  content—for  the  first  time  since  i'd  learned 
about my mother—to be doing what i was doing. 

 

389 

finally we all stepped back. our lady stood there 
with  her  chains  spilled  around  her  on  the  grass, 
absolutely golden with honey. one by one the daughters 
dipped  their  hands  into  a  bucket  of  water  and  washed 
off the honey. i waited till the very last, want ing to keep 
the coating of honey on my skin as long as i could. it was 
like i was wearing a pair of gloves with magic properties. 

like i could preserve whatever i touched. 
we left our lady in the yard while we ate, then 
returned and washed her with water the same slow way 
we'd washed her with honey. after neil and zach carried 
her  back  to  her  place  in  the  parlor,  everyone  left. 
august, june, and rosaleen started doing the dishes, but 
i slipped off to the honey house. i lay down on my cot, 
trying not to think. 

• • • 
have you noticed the more you try not to think, 
the  more  elaborate  your  thinking  episodes  get?  while 
trying  not  to  think,  i  spent  twenty  minutes  on  this 
fascinating question: if you could have one miracle from 
the bible happen to you, what would it be? 

i  eliminated  the  one  about  multiplying  loaves 
and  fishes,  as  i  never  wanted  to  see  food  again.  i  
thought  walking  on  water  would  be  interesting,  but 
what good was that? i mean, you walk on water, what's 

 

390 

the  point?  i  settled  on  getting  raised  from  the  dead, 
since a big part of me still felt dead as a doornail. 

all  this  took  place  before  i  even  realized  i  was  
thinking. i had just gone back to trying again not to think 
when august tapped on the door. 

"lily, can i come in?" 
"sure,"  i  said,  but  i  didn't  bother  to  get  up.  so 
much  for  not  thinking.  try  to  be  five  seconds  around 
august and not think. she breezed in holding a gold-and-
white-striped hatbox. she stood a moment looking down 
at me, seeming unusually tall. the fan on the little wall 
shelf rotated around and blew her collar, making it flap 
around her neck. 

she has brought me a hat, i thought. maybe she 
had  gone  down  to  the  amen  dollar  and  bought  me  a 
straw hat to cheer me up. but that didn't make a bit of 
sense, really. why would a straw hat cheer me up? then 
i thought for one second it might be the hat lunelle had 
promised  to  make  for  me,  but  that  didn't  fit  either.  
lunelle  wouldn't  have  had  time  to  sew  up  a  hat  this 
soon. 

august sat on rosaleen's old cot and placed the 

box on her lap. 

"i've  brought  you  some  of  your  mother's 

belongings." 

 

391 

i  stared  at  the  perfect  roundness  of  the  box. 
when  i  took  a  deep  breath,  it  stuttered  strangely  as  it  
came  out.  my  mother's  belongings.  i  didn't  move.  i  
smelled the air coming through the window, churned up 
by the fan. i could tell it had turned thick with afternoon 
rain, but the sky was holding back. 

"don't you want to see?" she said. 
"just tell me what's in it." 
she placed her hand on the lid and patted. "i'm 
not  sure  i  can  remember.  i  didn't  even  remember  the 
box  till  this  morning.  i  thought  we'd  open  it  together. 
but you don't have to look if you don't want to. it's just a 
handful of things your mother left here the day she went 
back to sylvan to get you. i finally gave her clothes away 
to  the  salvation  army,  but  i  kept  the  rest  of  her  stuff, 
what  little  there  was.  it's  been  in  this  box  ten  years,  i  
guess." 

i  sat  up.  i  could  hear  my  heart  thudding.  i  
wondered if august could hear it over there across the 
room.  boom-boom.  boom  boom.  in  spite  of  the  panic 
that  goes  along  with  it,  there's  something  familiar  and 
strangely comforting about hearing your heart beat like 
that. 

august set the box on the bed and removed the 
lid. i stretched up a little to see inside the box, unable to 

 

392 

glimpse  anything,  though,  but  white  tissue  paper, 
turning yellow around the edges. 

she  lifted  out  a  small  bundle  and  peeled  away 
the  tissue.  "your  mother's  pocket  mirror,"  she  said, 
holding  it  up.  it  was  oval  shaped  and  surrounded  by  a 
tortoise frame, no bigger than the palm of my hand. 

i eased off the bed and slid down onto the floor, 
where  i  rested  my  back  against  the  bed.  a  little  closer  
than before. august acted like she was waiting for me to 
reach out and take the mirror. i practically had to sit on 
my hands. finally august lifted it up and peered inside it 
herself.  circles  of  light  bounced  around  on  the  wall 
behind her. "if you look in here, you're gonna see your 
mother's face looking back at you," she said. 

i will never look in that mirror, i thought. 
laying  it  on  the  bed,  august  reached  into  the 
hatbox  and  unwrapped  a  hairbrush  with  a  wooden 
handle and offered it to me. 

before i thought, i took it. the handle felt funny 
in  my  hand,  cool  and  smooth-edged,  like  it  had  been 
worn  down  by  excessive  holding.  i  wondered  if  she'd 
brushed her hair a hundred strokes every day. 

as i was about to hand the brush back to august, 
i  saw  a  long,  black,  wavy  hair  threaded  through  the 
bristles. i brought the brush close to my face and stared 
at it, my mother's hair, a genuine part of her body. 

 

393 

"well, i'll be," august said. 
i could not take my eyes off it. it had grown out 
of  her  head  and now  perched  there  like  a thought  she 
had left behind on the brush. i knew then that no matter 
how hard you tried, no matter how many jars of honey 
you threw, no matter how much you thought you could 
leave  your  mother  behind,  she  would  never  disappear 
from the tender places in you. i pressed my back against 
the  bed  and  felt  tears  coming.  the  brush  and  the  hair 
belonging  to  deborah  fontanel  owens  swam  in  my 
vision. 

i handed the brush back to august, who dropped 
a piece of jewelry into my hand. a gold pin shaped like a 
whale  with  a  tiny  black  eye  and  a  spout  of  rhinestone 
water coming from its blowhole. 

"she  was  wearing  that  pin  on  her  sweater  the 

day she got here," august said. 

i closed my fingers around it, then walked on my 
knees over to rosaleen's bed and placed it alongside the 
pocket mirror and the brush, moving them around like i 
was working on a collage. 

i  used  to  lay  out  my christmas  presents on  the 
bed the  same way. there  would  usually be  four  whole 
things  that  t.  ray  had  gotten  the  lady  at  the  sylvan 
mercantile to pick out for me—sweater, socks, pajamas, 
sack of oranges. merry christmas. you could bet your life 

 

394 

on  the  gift  list.  i  would  arrange  them  for  display  in  a 
vertical  line,  a  square,  a  diagonal  line,  any  kind  of 
configuration to help me feel like they were a picture of 
love. 

when  i  looked  up  at  august,  she  was  pulling  a 
black book from the box. "i gave your mother this while 
she was here. english poetry." 

i took the book in my hand, leafing through the 
pages, noticing pencil marks in the margins, not words, 
but strange little doodles, spiraling tornadoes, a flock of 
vs, squiggles with eyes, pots with lids, pots with faces, 
pots  with  curly  things  boiling  out,  little  puddles  that 
would suddenly give rise to a terrible wave. i was staring 
at my mother's private miseries, and it made me want to 
go outside and bury the book in the dirt. 

page  forty-two.  that's  where  i  came  to  eight  
lines  by  william  blake  that  she'd  underlined,  some 
words twice. 

o 

rose, 

thou 

art 

flies 
the 
found 

the 
that 
in 
has 
of 
and 
does thy life destroy. 

his 

 

invisible 

in 

the 

howling 

thy 

secret 

out 
crimson 
dark 

395 

sick! 
worm, 
night, 
storm, 
bed 
joy, 
love 

i closed the book. i wanted the words to flow off 
me, but they had stuck. my mother was william blake's 
rose. i wanted nothing so much as to tell her how sorry i 
was for being one of the invisible worms that flew in the 
night. 

i  placed  the  book  on  the  bed  with  the  other 
things,  then  turned  back  to  august,  while  she  reached 
down  into  the  box  again,  causing  the  tissue  paper  to 
whisper. "one last thing," she said, and she drew out a 
small oval picture frame of tarnished silver. 

when  she  passed  it  to  me,  she  held  on  to  my  
hands for a second. the frame contained a picture of a 
woman in profile, her head bent toward a little girl who 
sat  in  a  high  chair  with  a  smudge  of  baby  food  on  the  
side  of  her  mouth.  the  woman's  hair  curled  in  forty 
directions,  beautiful,  like  it  had  just  had  its  hundred 
strokes. she held a baby spoon in her right hand. light 
glazed  her  face.  the  little  girl  wore  a  bib  with  a  teddy  
bear on it. a sprig of hair on top of her head was tied 
with a bow. she lifted one hand toward the woman. 

me and my mother. 
i didn't care about anything on this earth except 
the way her face was tipped toward mine, our noses just 
touching,  how  wide  and  gorgeous  her  smile  was,  like 
sparklers going  off. she had  fed me with a  tiny spoon. 

 

396 

she had rubbed her  nose  against mine and poured her 
light on my face. 

through  the  open  window  the  air  smelled  like 
carolina  jasmine,  which  is  the  true  smell  of  south 
carolina. i walked over and propped my elbows on the 
sill and breathed as deeply as i could. behind me i heard 
august shift on the cot, the legs squeak, then relax. 

i  looked  down  at  the  picture,  then  closed  my 
eyes.  i  figured  may  must've  made  it  to  heaven  and 
explained  to  my  mother  about  the  sign  i  wanted.  the 
one that would let me know i was loved. 
 

 

 

397 

chapter fourteen 

a  queenless  colony  is  a  pitiful  and 
melancholy  community;  there  may  be  a  mournful 
wail  or  lament  from  within.  without  intervention, 
the colony will die. but introduce a new queen and 
the most extravagant change takes place. 

—the queen must die: and other affairs 

of bees and men 
 

after  august  and  i  went  through  the  hatbox,  i 
drew  into  myself  and  stayed  there  for  a  while.  august 
and zach tended to the bees and the honey, but i spent 
most of my time down by the river, alone. i just wanted 
to keep to myself. 

the  month  of  august  had  turned  into  a  griddle 
where  the  days  just  lay  there  and  sizzled.  i  plucked 
leaves  off the elephant ear plants and fanned my  face, 
sat with my bare feet submerged in the trickling water, 
felt breezes lift off the river surface and sweep over me, 
and still everything about me was stunned stupefied by 

 

398 

the  heat,  everything  except  my  heart.  it  sat  like  an  ice  
sculpture in the center of my chest. nothing could touch 
it. people, in general, would rather die than forgive. it's 
that hard. 

if  god  said  in  plain  language,  "i'm  giving  you  a 
choice, forgive or die," a lot of people would go ahead 
and order their coffin. 

i wrapped my mother's things in the falling-apart 
paper, tucked them back in the hatbox, and put the lid 
on it. lying on my stomach on the floor, pushing the box 
under  my  cot,  i  found  a  tiny  pile  of  mouse  bones.  i  
scooped  them  up  and  washed  them  in  the  sink.  every 
day  i carried them around  in  my  pocket  and  could  not 
imagine why i was doing it. 

when  i  woke  up  in  the  mornings,  my  first  
thought was the hatbox. it was almost like my mother 
herself was hiding under the bed. one night i had to get 
up and move it to the other side of the room. then i had 
to strip off my pillowcase and stuff the box down inside 
it and tie it closed with one of my hair ribbons. all this 
just so i could sleep. 

i  would  walk  to  the  pink  house  to  use  the 
bathroom and think, my mother sat on this same toilet, 
and then i would hate myself for thinking it. who cared 
where  she  sat  to  pee?  she  hadn't  cared  a  whole  lot  
about my bathroom habits when she abandoned me to 

 

399 

mrs. watson and t. ray. i gave myself pep talks. don't 
think about her. it is over and done. the next minute, i 
swear to god, i would be picturing her in the pink house, 
or  out  by  the  wailing  wall,  stuffing her  burdens  among 
the stones. i would've bet twenty dollars t. ray's name 
was  squashed  into  the  cracks  and  crevices  out  there. 
maybe the name lily was out there, too. i wished she'd 
been  smart  enough,  or 
loving  enough,  to  realize 
everybody has burdens that crush them, only they don't 
give up their children. 

in  a  weird  way  i  must  have  loved  my  little 
collection of hurts and wounds. they provided me with 
some  real
 nice  sympathy,  with  the  feeling  i  was  
exceptional.  i was  the girl  abandoned  by her  mother.  i 
was the girl who kneeled on grits. what a special case i 
was. 

we were deep into mosquito season, so a lot of 
what i did by the river was swat at them. sitting in the 
purple  shadows,  i  pulled  out  the  mouse  bones  and 
worked them between my fingers. i stared at things until 
i  seemed  to  melt  right  into  them.  sometimes  i  would  
forget lunch, and rosaleen would come find me, bearing 
a tomato sandwich. after she left, i would throw it in the 
river. 

at  times  i  could  not  prevent  myself  from  lying 
flat on the ground, pretending i was inside one of those 

 

400 

beehive tombs. i felt the same way i did right after may 
died, only multiplied by a hundred. 

august  had  said,  "i  guess  you  need  to  grieve  a 
little while. so go ahead and do it." but now that i was 
doing it, i couldn't seem to stop. 

i  knew  that  august  must  have  explained 
everything to zach, and june, too, because they tiptoed 
around  me  like  i  was  a  psychiatric  case.  maybe  i  was. 
maybe i was the one who belonged on bull street, not 
my  mother.  at 
least  no  one  prodded,  or  asked 
questions, or said, "for pete's sake, snap out of it." 

i wondered how much longer it would be before 
august had to act on the things i'd told her—me running 
away,  helping  rosaleen  escape.  rosaleen,  a  fugitive. 
august  was  giving  me  time  for  now,  time  to  be  by  the  
river  and do what  i had to  do, the same way she  gave 
herself  time  there  after  may  died.  but  it  wouldn't  last 
forever. 

• • • 
it  is  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  world  to  go  on  
is 
spinning  no  matter  what  sort  of  heartbreak 
happening. june set a wedding date, saturday, october 
10. 

neil's  brother,  an  african  methodist/episcopal 
reverend  from  albany,  georgia,  was  going  to  marry 
them in the  backyard under the myrtle  trees.  june laid 

 

401 

out all their plans one night at dinner. she would come 
walking  down  an  aisle  of  rose  petals,  wearing  a  white 
rayon  suit  with  frog  closings  that  mabelee  was  sewing 
for  her.  i  could  not  picture  frog  closings.  june  drew  a 
picture of one on a tablet, and afterward i still could not 
picture them. lunelle had been commissioned to make 
her a wedding hat, which i thought was very courageous 
of  june.  there  was  no  telling  what  she  would  end  up 
with on her head. 

rosaleen  offered  to  bake  the  wedding  cake 
layers, and violet and queenie were going to decorate it 
with a "rainbow theme." 

again, all i can say is how brave june was. 
one  afternoon  i  went  to  the  kitchen  in  the 
middle of the afternoon, nearly dying of thirst, wanting 
to fill a jug with water and take it back to the river, and 
found  june  and  august  clinging  to  each  other  in  the 
middle of the floor. 

i  stood  outside  the  door  and  watched,  even 
though it was a private moment. june gripped august's 
back, and her hands trembled. 

"may  would've  loved  this  wedding,"  she  said. 
"she  must've  told  me  a  hundred  times  i  was  being 
stubborn about neil. oh, god, august, why didn't i do it 
sooner, while she was still alive?" 

 

402 

august turned slightly and caught sight of me in 

the doorway. 

she held june, who was starting to  cry, but she 
kept  her  eyes  on  mine.  she  said,  "regrets  don't  help 
anything, you know that." 

• • • 
the  next  day  i

 actually  felt  like  eating.

 i
wandered  in  for  lunch to  find  rosaleen  wearing  a  new 
dress and her hair freshly plaited. she was poking tissues 
into her bosom for safekeeping. 

 

"where did you get that dress?" i said. 
she  turned  a  circle,  modeling  it,  and  when  i 
smiled, she turned another one. it was what you would 
call  a  tent  dress—yards  of  material  falling  from  her  
shoulders without benefit of waistband and darts. it had 
a bright red background with giant white flowers all over 
it. i could see she was in love with it. 

"august  took  me  into  town  yesterday,  and  i  
bought it," she said. i felt startled suddenly by the things 
that had been going on without me. 

"your dress is pretty," i lied, noticing for the first 

time there were no lunch fixings anywhere. 

she  smoothed  her  hands  down  the  front  of  it, 
looked at the clock on the stove, and reached for an old 
white vinyl purse of may's that she'd inherited. 

"you going somewhere?" i said. 

403 

 

"she  sure  is,"  said  august,  stepping  into  the 

room, smiling at rosaleen. 

"i'm gonna finish what i started," rosaleen said, 

lifting her chin. "i'm gonna register to vote." 

my  arms  dropped  by  my  sides,  and  my  mouth 
came  open.  "but  what about—what  about you  being… 
you know?" 

rosaleen squinted at me. "what?" 
"a  fugitive  from  justice,"  i  said.  "what  if  they  

recognize your name? what if you get caught?" 

i cut my eyes over at august. 
"oh, i don't think there'll be a problem," august 
said, taking the truck keys off the brass nail by the door. 
"we're  going  to  the  voter  drive  at  the  negro  high  
school." 

"but—" 
"for  heaven's  sake,  all  i'm  doing  is  getting  my 

voter's card," said rosaleen. 

"that's what you said last time," i told her. 
she  ignored  that.  she  strapped  may's  purse  on 
her  arm.  a  split  ran  from  the  handle  around  onto  the 
side. 

"you wanna come, lily?" said august. 
i  did  and  i  didn't.  i  looked  down  at  my  feet, 

tanned and bare. 

"i'll just stay here and make some lunch." 

404 

 

august  lifted  her  eyebrows.  "it's  nice  to  see 

you're hungry for a change." 

they went onto the back porch, down the steps. 
i followed them to the truck. as rosaleen got in, i said, 
"don't spit on anybody's shoes, okay?" 

she  let  out  a  laugh  that  made  her  whole  body 
shake.  it  looked  like  all  the  flowers  on  her  dress  were 
bobbing in a gust of wind. i went back inside, boiled two 
hot  dogs,  and  ate  them  without  buns.  then  i  headed 
back  to  the  woods,  where  i  picked  a  few  bachelor  
buttons  that  grew  wild  in  the  plots  of  sunshine  before 
getting bored and tossing them away. 

• • • 
i sat on the ground, expecting to sink down into 
my dark mood and think about my mother, but the only 
thoughts  i  had  were  for  rosaleen.  i  pictured  her 
standing  in  a  line  of  people.  i  could  almost  see  her 
practicing writing her name. getting it just right. her big 
moment. suddenly i wished i'd gone with them. i wished 
it  more  than  anything.  i  wanted  to  see  her  face  when 
they handed her her card. i wanted to say, rosaleen, you 
know what? i'm proud of you. 

what was i doing sitting out here in the woods? 
i got up and went inside. passing the telephone 
in  the  hallway,  i  had  an  urge  to  call  zach.  to  become  
part of the world again. i dialed his number. 

 

405 

when he answered, i said, "so what's new?" 
"who's this?" he said. 
"very funny," i told him. 
"i'm  sorry  about…  everything,"  he  said.  "august 
told me what happened." silence floated between us a 
moment, and then he said, "will you have to go back?" 

"you mean back to my father?" 
he hesitated. "yeah." 
the  minute  he  said  it,  i  had  the  feeling  that's 
exactly what would happen. everything in my body felt 
it. "i suppose so," i said. i coiled the phone cord around 
my finger and stared down the hall at the front door. for 
a  few  seconds  i  was  unable  to  look  away,  imagining 
myself leaving through it and not coming back. 

"i'll come see you," he said, and i wanted to cry. 
zach knocking on the door of  t. ray owens's house. it 
could never happen. 

"i asked you what was new, remember?" i didn't 
expect  anything  was,  but  i  needed  to  change  the 
subject. 

"well, for starters, i'll be going to the white high 

school this year." 

i  was  speechless.  i  squeezed  the  phone  in  my 
hand. "are you sure you wanna do that?" i said. i knew 
what those places were like. 

 

406 

"somebody's got to," he said. "might as well be 

me." 

both  of  us,  it  seemed  like,  were  doomed  to 

misery. 

rosaleen  came  home,  a  bona  fide  registered 
voter in the united states of america. we all sat around 
that evening, waiting to eat dinner, while she personally 
called every one of the daughters on the telephone. 

"i just wanted to tell you i'm a registered voter," 
she  said  each  time,  and  there  would  be  a  pause,  and 
then  she'd  say,  "president  johnson  and  mr.  hubert 
humphrey, that's who. i'm not voting for mr. pisswater." 
she laughed every time, like this was the joke of jokes. 
she would say, "goldwater, pisswater, get it?" 

this  went on even after  dinner,  just  when we'd 
think she had it out of her system, out of the complete 
blue, she'd say, "i'll be casting my vote for mr. johnson." 
when  she  finally  wound  down  and  said  good 
night,  i  watched  her  climb  the  stairs  wearing  her  red-
and-white  voter-registration  dress,  and  i  wished  again 
that i'd been there. regrets don't help anything, august 
had  told  june,  you  know  that.  i  ran  up  the  stairs  and 
grabbed  rosaleen  from  behind,  stopping  her  with  one 
foot  poised  in  the  air,  searching  for  the  next  step.  i 
wrapped my arms around her middle. 

 

407 

"i  love  you,"  i  blurted  out,  not  even  knowing  i  

was going to say this. 

• • • 
that night when the katydids and tree frogs and 
every other musical creature were wound up and going 
strong, i  walked  around the honey  house,  feeling like  i 
had  spring  fever.  it  was  ten  o'clock  at  night,  and  i  
honestly  felt  like  i  could've  scrubbed  the  floors  and 
washed the windows. 

i  went  over  to  the  shelves  and  straightened  all  
the  mason  jars.  then  took  the  broom  and  swept  the 
floor,  up  under  the  holding  tank  and  the  generator, 
where nobody had swept for fifty years, it looked like. i 
still wasn't tired, so i stripped the sheets off my bed and 
went over to the pink house and got a set of clean ones, 
careful to tiptoe around and not wake anybody up. i got 
dust rags and comet cleanser in case i needed them. 

i came back, and before i knew it i was involved 
in  a  fullblown  cleaning  frenzy.  by  midnight  i  had  the 
place shining. 

i even went through my stuff and got rid of some 
things.  old  pencils,  a  couple  of  stories  i'd  written  that 
were too embarrassing for anybody to read, a torn pair 
of shorts, a comb with most of its teeth missing. 

next i gathered up the mouse bones that i'd kept 
in  my  pockets,  realizing  i  didn't  need  to  carry  them 

 

408 

around anymore. but i knew i couldn't throw them away 
either, so i tied them together with a red hair ribbon and 
set  them  on  the  shelf  by  the  fan.  i  stared  at  them  a  
minute, wondering how a person got attached to mouse 
bones.  i  decided  sometimes  you  just  need  to  nurse 
something, that's all. 

by now i was starting to get tired, but i took my 
mother's  things  out  of  the  hatbox—her  tortoiseshell 
mirror,  her  brush,  the  poetry  book,  her whale  pin,  the 
picture of us with our faces together—and set them up 
on  the  shelf  with  the  mouse  bones.  i  have  to  say,  it 
made the whole room look different. 

drifting  off  to  sleep,  i  thought  about  her.  how 
nobody is perfect. how you just have to close your eyes 
and breathe out and let the puzzle of the human heart 
be what it is. 
• • • 
the  next  morning  i  showed  up  in  the  kitchen 
with  the whale pin fastened to my favorite blue top. a 
nat  king  cole  record  was  going.  "unforgettable,  that's 
what  you  are."  i  think  it  was  on  to  drown  out  all  the  
commotion the pink lady kenmore washer was making 
on  the  porch.  it  was  a  wondrous  invention,  but  it 
sounded  like  a  cement  mixer.  august  sat  with  her 
elbows  on  the  tabletop,  drinking  the  last  of  her  coffee 
and reading another book from the bookmobile. 

 

409 

when she  lifted her eyes, they took in my face, 
then  went  straight  to  the  whale  pin.  i  saw  her  smile  
before she went back to her book. 

i  fixed  my  standard  rice  krispies  with  raisins. 
after i finished eating, august said, "come on out to the 
hives. i need to show you something." 

we got all decked out in our bee outfits—at least 
i did. august hardly ever wore anything but the hat and 
veil. 

walking  out  there,  august  widened  her  step  to 
miss squashing an ant. it reminded me of may. i said, "it 
was  may  who  got  my  mother  started  saving  roaches, 
wasn't it?" 

"who  else?"  she  said, and  smiled.  "it  happened 
when  your  mother  was  a  teenager.  may  caught  her 
killing  a  roach  with  a  fly  swatter.  she  said,  "deborah 
fontanel,  every  living  creature  on  the  earth  is  special. 
you  want  to  be  the  one  that  puts  an  end  to  one  of 
them?"'  then  she  showed  her  how  to  make  a  trail  of 
marshmallows and graham crackers." 

i  fingered  the  whale  pin  on  my  shoulder, 
picturing  the  whole  thing.  then  i  looked  around  and 
noticed the world. it was such a pretty day you couldn't 
imagine anything coming along to spoil it. 

according  to  august,  if  you've  never  seen  a 
cluster  of  beehives  first  thing  in  the  morning,  you've 

 

410 

missed  the  eighth  wonder  of  the  world.  picture  these 
white boxes tucked under pine trees. the sun will slant 
through  the  branches,  shining  in  the  sprinkles  of  dew 
drying  on  the  lids.  there  will  be  a  few  hundred  bees 
doing laps around the hive boxes, just warming up, but 
mostly taking their bathroom break, as bees are so clean 
they will not soil the side of their hives. from a distance 
it will look like a big painting you might see in a museum, 
but  museums  can't  capture  the  sound.  fifty  feet  away 
you will hear it, a humming that sounds like it came from 
another  planet.  at  thirty  feet  your  skin  will  start  to 
vibrate.  the  hair  will  lift  on  your  neck.  your  head  will 
say, don't go any farther, but your heart will send you 
straight into the hum, where you will be swallowed by it. 
you will stand there and think, i am in the center of the 
universe, where everything is sung to life. 

august  lifted  the  lid  off  a  hive.  "this  one  is  

missing its queen," she said. 

i'd  learned  enough  beekeeping  to  know  that  a 
hive without a queen was a death sentence for the bees. 
they  would  stop  work  and  go  around  completely 
demoralized. 

"what happened?" i said. 
"i discovered it yesterday. the bees were sitting 
out here on the landing board looking melancholy. if you 
see bees loafing and lamenting, you can bet their queen 

 

411 

is  dead.  so  i  searched  through  the  combs,  and  sure 
enough  she  was  gone.  i  don't  know  what  caused  it. 
maybe it was just her time." 

"what do you do now?" 
"i called the county extension, and they put me 
in touch with a man in goose creek who said he'd drive 
over  with  a  new  queen  sometime  today.  i  want  to  get  
the  hive  requeened  before  one  of  the  workers  starts 
laying.  if  we  get  laying  workers,  we've  got  ourselves  a 
mess." 

"i  didn't  know  a  worker  bee  could  lay  eggs,"  i  

said. 

"all they can do, really, is lay unfertilized drone 
eggs.  they'll  fill  up  the  combs  with  them,  and  as  the 
workers  naturally  die  off,  there  are  none  to  replace 
them." 

as she lowered the lid, she said, "i just wanted to 

show you what a queenless colony looked like." 

she lifted back the veils from her hat, then lifted 
mine  back,  too.  she  held  my  gaze  while  i  studied  the 
gold flecks in her eyes. 

"remember  when 

i  told  you  the  story  of 
beatrix,"  she  said,  "the  nun  who  ran  away  from  her  
convent?  remember  how  the  virgin  mary  stood  in  for 
her?" 

 

412 

"i remember," i said. "i figured you knew i'd run 
away  like  beatrix  did.  you  were  trying  to  tell  me  that  
mary  was  standing  in  for  me  at  home,  taking  care  of  
things till i went back." 

"oh,  that's  not  what  i  was  trying  to  tell  you  at  

all," she said. 

"you weren't the runaway i was thinking about. i 
was thinking about your mother running away. i was just 
trying to plant a little idea in your head." 

"what idea?" 
"that maybe our lady could act for deborah and 

be like a stand-in mother for you." 

the  light  was  making  patterns  on  the  grass.  i  
stared  at  them,  feeling  shy  about  what  i  was  going  to  
say. "i told our lady one night in the pink house that she 
was my mother. i put my hand on her heart the way you 
and the daughters always do at your meetings. i know i 
tried it that one time before and fainted, but this time i 
stayed on my feet, and for a while after that i really did 
feel  stronger.  then  i  seemed  to  lose  it.  i  think  what  i  
need is to go back and touch her heart again." 

august said, "listen to me now, lily. i'm going to 
tell you something i want you always to remember, all 
right?" 

her face had grown serious, intent. her eyes did 

not blink. 

 

413 

"all  right,"  i  said,  and  i  felt  something  electric 

slide down my spine. 

"our  lady  is  not  some  magical  being  out  there 
somewhere, like a fairy godmother. she's not the statue 
in  the  parlor.  she's  something  inside  of  you.  do  you 
understand what i'm telling you?" 

"our  lady  is  inside  me,"  i  repeated,  not  sure  i 

did. 

"you  have  to find a  mother  inside  yourself. we 
all do. even if we already have a mother, we still have to 
find this part of ourselves inside." she held out her hand 
to me. "give me your hand." 

i  lifted  my  left  hand  and  placed  it  in  hers.  she 
took  it  and  pressed  the  flat  of  my  palm  up  against  my  
chest,  over  my  beating  heart.  "you  don't  have  to  put 
your  hand  on  mary's  heart  to  get  strength  and 
consolation and rescue, and all the other things we need 
to get through life," she said. "you can place it right here 
on your own heart. your own heart." 

august  stepped  closer.  she  kept  the  pressure 
steady  against  my  hand.  "all  those  times  your  father 
treated  you  mean,  our  lady  was  the  voice  in  you  that 
said, "no, i will not bow down to this. i am lily melissa 
owens,  i will  not  bow down." whether  you  could  hear 
this voice or not, she was in there saying it." 

 

414 

i  took  my  other  hand  and  placed  it  on  top  of 
hers, and she moved her free hand on top of it, so we 
had this black-and-white stack of hands resting upon my 
chest. 

"when  you're  unsure  of  yourself,"  she  said, 
"when you start pulling back into doubt and small living, 
she's the one inside saying, 

"get up from there and live like the glorious girl 
you are." she's the power inside you, you understand?" 
her hands stayed where they were but released 

their pressure. 

"and  whatever  it  is  that  keeps  widening  your  
heart,  that's  mary,  too,  not  only  the  power  inside  you 
but the love. and when you get down to it, lily, that's 
the only purpose grand enough for a human life. not just 
to love—but to persist in love." 

she paused. bees drummed their sound into the 
air.  august  retrieved  her  hands  from  the  pile  on  my 
chest, but i left mine there. 

"this mary i'm talking about sits in your heart all 
day  long,  saying,  'lily,  you  are  my  everlasting  home. 
don't you ever be afraid. i am enough. we are enough.'" 
i closed my eyes, and in the coolness of morning, 
there among the bees, i felt for one clear instant what 
she was talking about. 

 

415 

when  i  opened  my  eyes,  august  was  nowhere 
around.  i  looked  back  toward  the  house  and  saw  her 
crossing the yard, her white dress catching the light. 

• • • 
the knock on the door came at 2:00 p.m. i was 
sitting  in  the  parlor  writing  in  the  new  notebook  zach 
had  left  at  my  door,  setting  down  everything  that  had 
happened to me since mary day. 

words streamed out of me so fast i couldn't keep 
up with them, and that's all i was thinking about. i didn't 
pay  attention  to  the  knock.  later  i  would  remember  it  
didn't  sound  like  an  ordinary  knock.  more  like  a  fist 
pounding. 

i kept writing, waiting for august to answer it. i 
was sure it was the man from goose creek with the new 
queen bee. 

the  pounding  came  again.  june  had  gone  off 
with neil. rosaleen was  in  the honey  house washing a 
new shipment of mason jars, a job that belonged to me, 
but she'd volunteered for it, seeing how badly i needed 
to write everything out. i didn't know where august was. 
probably in the honey house, helping rosaleen. 

i look back and wonder: how did i not guess who 

was there? 

the  third  time  the  knocking  came,  i got  up and 

opened the door. 

 

416 

t.  ray  stared  at  me,  clean-shaven,  wearing  a 
white short sleeved shirt with chest hair curling through 
the neck opening. 

he was  smiling. not a smile of  sweet adoring, i 
hasten to say, but the fat grin of a man who has been 
rabbit  hunting  all  day  long  and  has  just  now  found  his 
prey backed up in a hollow log with no way out. he said, 
"well, well, well. look who's here." 

i had a sudden, terror-stricken thought he might 
that  second  drag  me  out  to  his  truck  and  hightail  it 
straight back to the peach farm, where i would never be 
heard from again. i stepped backward into the hallway, 
andwitha  forced  politeness  that  surprised  me  and 
seemed to throw him offstride, i said, "won't you come 
in?" 

what else was i going to do? i turned and forced 

myself to walk calmly into the parlor. 

his boots clomped after me. "all right, goddamn 
it,"  he  said,  speaking  to  the  back  of  my  head.  "if  you  
want to pretend i'm making a social visit, we'll pretend, 
but this ain't a social visit, you hear me? i spent half my 
summer looking for you, and i'm gonna take you out of 
here  nice  and  quiet  or  kicking  and  scream  ing—don't 
matter which to me." 

i motioned to a rocking chair. "have a seat if you 
want to." i was trying to look ho-hum, when inside i was 

 

417 

close to full blown panic. where was august? my breath 
had turned into short, shallow puffs, a dog pant. 

he flopped into the rocker and pushed back and 
forth,  that  got-you-now  grin  glued  on  his  face.  "so 
you've been here the whole time, staying with colored 
women. jesus christ." 

without realizing it, i'd backed over to the statue 
of  our  lady.  i stood,  immobilized,  while he  looked  her 
over. "what the hell is that?" 

"a  statue  of  mary,"  i  said.  "you  know,  jesus' 
mother." my voice sounded skittish in my throat. inside, 
i was racking my brain for something to do. 

"well, it looks like something from the junkyard," 

he said. 

"how did you find me?" 
sliding up on the edge of the cane seat, he dug in 
his  pants  pocket  until  he brought  up his knife,  the one 
he used to clean his nails with. "it was you who led me 
here," he said, puffed up and pleased as punch to share 
the news. 

"i did no such thing." 
he tugged the blade out of the knife bed, pushed 
the point into the arm of the rocker, and carved out little 
chunks of wood, taking his sweet time to explain. "oh, 
you  led  me  here,  all  right.  yesterday  the  phone  bill 
came, and guess what i found on there? one collect call 

 

418 

from  a  lawyer's  office  in  tiburon.  mr.  clayton  forrest. 
big mistake, lily, calling me collect." 

"you  went  to  mr.  clayton's  and  he  told  you  

where i was?" 

"no,  but  he  has  an  old-lady  secretary  who  was 
more than happy to fill me in. she said i would find you 
right here." 

stupid miss lacy. 
"where's rosaleen?" he said. 
"she took off a long time ago," i lied. 
he  might  kidnap  me  back  to  sylvan,  but  there 
was  no  need  for  him  to  know  where  rosaleen  was.  i 
could spare her that much at least. 

he  didn't  comment  on  rosaleen,  though.  he 
seemed happy to carve up the arm of the rocking chair 
like he was all of eleven years old, putting his initials in a 
tree. i think he was glad he didn't have to fool with her. i 
wondered how i would survive back in sylvan. without 
rosaleen. 

suddenly he stopped rocking, and the nauseating 
smile faded off his mouth. he was staring at my shoulder 
with  his  eyes  squinted  almost  to  the  closed  position.  i 
looked down to see what had grabbed his attention and 
realized he was staring at the whale pin on my shirt. 

he  got  to  his  feet  and  walked  over  to  me,  
deliberately stopping four or five feet away, like the pin 

 

419 

had  some  kind  of  voodoo  curse  on  it.  "where  did  you 
get that?" he said. 

my hand went up involuntarily and touched the 
little  rhinestone  spout.  "august  gave  it  to  me.  the  
woman who lives here." 
"don't lie to me." 
"i'm  not  lying.  she  gave  it  to  me.  she  said  it  
belonged  to—"  i  was  afraid  to  say  it.  he  didn't  know 
anything about august and my mother. 

his  upper  lip  had  gone  white,  the  way  it  did 
when  he  was  badly  upset.  "i  gave  that  pin  to  your 
mother  on  her  twenty-second  birthday,"  he  said.  "you 
tell me right now, how did this august woman get it?" 

"you gave this pin to my mother? you did?" 
"answer me, damn it." 
"this  is  where  my  mother  came  when  she  ran  
away  from  us.  august  said  she  was  wearing  it  the  day  
she got here." 

he  walked  back  to  the  rocker,  shaken-looking, 
and eased down onto the seat. "i'll be goddamned," he 
said, so low i could hardly hear him. 

"august used to take care of her back when she 

was a little girl in virginia," i said, trying to explain. 

he stared into the air, into nothing. through the 
window, out there in the  carolina summer, i could see 
the sun beating down on the roof of his truck, lighting up 

 

420 

the tips of the picket fence that had all but disappeared 
under  the  jasmine.  the  truck  was  spattered  with  mud, 
like he'd been trolling the swamps looking for me. 

"i should have known." he was shaking his head, 
talking  like  i  wasn't  in  the  room.  "i  looked  for  her  
everywhere i could think. and she was right here. jesus 
christ, she was right here." 

the  thought  seemed  to  awe  him.  he  shook  his 
head and looked around, as if thinking, i  bet she sat in 
this chair. i bet she walked on this rug. his chin quivered 
slightly,  and  for  the  first  time  it  hit  me  how  much  he  
must've loved her, how it had split him open when she 
left. 

before  coming  here,  my  whole  life  had  been 
nothing but a hole where my mother should have been, 
and  this  hole  had  made  me  different,  left  me  always  
aching  for  something,  but  never  once  did  i  think  what 
he'd lost or how it might've changed him. 

i thought about august's words. people can start 
out  one  way,  and  by  the  time  life  gets  through  with  
them they end up completely different. i don't doubt he 
started  off  loving  your  mother.  in  fact,  i  think  he 
worshiped her. 

i  had  never  known  t.  ray  to  worship  anyone 
except  snout,  the  dog  love  of  his  life,  but  seeing  him 

 

421 

now,  i  knew  he'd  loved  deborah  fontanel,  and  when 
she'd left him, he'd sunk into bitterness. 

he jabbed the knife into the wood and got to his 
feet. i looked at the handle sticking in the air, then at t. 
ray as he walked around the room touching things, the 
piano,  the  hatrack,  a  look  magazine  on  the  drop-leaf 
table. 

"looks like you're here by yourself?" he said. 
i could feel it coming. the end of everything. 
he  walked  straight  toward  me  and  reached  for  
my arm. when i jerked away, he brought his hand across 
my  face.  t.  ray  had  slapped  me  lots  of  times  before,  
clean,  sharp  smacks  on  the  cheek,  the  kind  that  cause 
you  to  draw  a  quick,  stunned  breath,  but  this  was 
something else, not a slap at all. this time he'd hit me 
full force. i'd heard the grunt of exertion escape his lips 
as  the  blow  landed,  seen  the  momentary  bulge  of  his 
eyes.  and  i'd  smelled  the  farm  on  his  hand,  smelled 
peaches. 

the  impact  threw  me  backward  into  our  lady. 
she crashed onto the floor a second before i did. i didn't 
feel  the  pain  at  first,  but  sitting  up,  gathering  my  feet  
under  me,  it  slashed  from  my  ear  down  to  my  chin.  it  
caused me to drop back again onto the floor. i stared up 
at him with my hands clutched at my chest, wondering if 
he would pull me by my feet outside to his truck. 

 

422 

he was shouting. "how dare you leave me! you 

need a lesson, is what you need!" 

i filled my lungs with air, tried to steady myself. 
black  mary  lay  beside  me  on  the  floor,  giving  off  the  
overpowering smell of  honey. i remembered how we'd 
smoothed it into her, every little crack and grain till she 
was  honey-logged  and  satisfied.  i  lay  there  afraid  to 
move, aware of the knife stuck in the arm of the chair 
across the room. he kicked at me, his boot landing in my 
calf, like i was a tin can in the road that he might as well 
kick because it was there in front of him. 

he  stood  over  me.  "deborah,"  i  heard  him  
mumble. "you're not leaving me again." his eyes looked 
frantic, scared. i wondered if i'd heard him right. 

i noticed my hands still cupped over my chest. i 

pressed them down, hard into my flesh. 

"get up!" he yelled. "i'm taking you home." 
he had me by the arm in one swoop, lifting me 
up. once on my feet, i wrenched away and ran for the 
door.  he  came  after  me  and  caught  me  by  the  hair.  
twisting to face him, i saw he had the knife. he waved it 
in front of my face. 

"you're  going  back  with  me!"  he  yelled.  "you 

never should have left me." 

 

423 

it crossed my mind that he was no longer talking 
to me but to deborah. like his mind had snapped back 
ten years. 

"t. ray," i said. "it's me—lily." 
he didn't hear me. he had a fistful of my hair and 

wouldn't let go. "deborah," he said. 

"goddamn bitch," he said. 
he  seemed  crazy  with  anguish,  reliving  a  pain 
he'd  kept  locked  up  all  this  time,  and  now  that  it  was  
loose, it had overwhelmed him. i wondered how far he'd 
go to try and take deborah back. for all i knew, he might 
kill her. 

i am your everlasting home. i am enough. we are 

enough. 

i looked into his eyes. they were full of a strange 

fogginess. 

"daddy," i said. 
i shouted it. "daddy!" 
he looked startled, then stared at me, breathing 
hard. he turned loose my hair and dropped the knife on 
the rug. i stumbled backward and caught myself. i heard 
myself  panting.  the  sound  filled  up  the  room.  i  didn't 
want  him  to  see  me  look  down  at  the  knife,  but  i  
couldn't  help  myself.  i  glanced  over  to  where  it  was.  
when i looked back at him, he was still staring at me. 

 

424 

for  a  moment  neither  of  us  moved.  i  couldn't 
read his  expression. my  whole body was shaking, but i 
felt i had to keep talking. 

"i'm—i'm sorry i left like i did," 
i said, taking small steps backward. 
the  skin  over  his  eyes  sagged  down  onto  his 
eyelids.  he  looked  away,  toward  the  window,  like  he 
was contemplating the road that had brought her here. 

i  heard  a  creaking  floorboard  in  the  hallway 
outside. turning, i saw august and rosaleen at the door. 
i gave  them a  quiet  signal  with  my hand, waving  them 
away. i think i just needed to see it through by myself, to 
be  with  him  while  he  came  back  to  his  senses.  he  
seemed so harmless, standing there now. 

for  a  moment  i  thought  they  were  going  to  
ignore me and come in anyway, but then august put her 
hand on rosaleen's arm and they eased out of sight. 

when  t.  ray  turned  back,  he  fastened  his  eyes 
on me, and there was nothing in them but an ocean of 
hurt.  he  looked  at  the  pin  on  my  shirt.  "you  look  like  
her,"  he  said,  and  him  saying  that,  i  knew  he'd  said 
everything. 

i  leaned  over  and  picked  up  his  knife,  bent  the 
blade closed, and handed it to him. "it's all right," i said. 
but  it  wasn't.  i had seen into  the  dark  doorway 
that he  kept hidden inside,  the terrible  place he would 

 

425 

seal up now and never return to if he could help it. he 
seemed suddenly ashamed. i watched him pushing out 
his lips, trying to gather back his pride, his anger, all that 
thunderclap  he'd  first  come  striding  in  here  with.  his 
hands were moving in and out of his pockets. 

"we're going home," he said. 
i didn't answer him, but walked over to our lady 
where she lay on the floor and lifted her upright. i could 
feel august and rosaleen outside the door, could almost 
hear their breathing. i touched my cheek. it was swelling 
where he'd hit me. 

"i'm staying  here," i said.  "i'm not leaving."  the 
words  hung  there,  hard  and  gleaming.  like  pearls  i'd 
been fashioning down inside my belly for weeks. 

"what did you say?" 
"i said i'm not leaving." 
"you think i'm gonna walk out of here and leave 
you? i don't even know these damn people." he seemed 
to  struggle  to  make  his  words  forceful  enough.  the 
anger had been washed out of him when he'd dropped 
the knife. 

"i  know  them,"  i  said.  "august  boatwright  is  a 

good person." 

"what makes you think she would even want you 

here?" 

 

426 

"lily  can  have  a  home  here  for  as  long  as  she  
wants,"  august  said,  stepping  into  the  room,  rosaleen 
right beside her. i went and stood with them. outside, i 
heard  queenie's  car  pull  into  the  driveway.  it  had  a 
muffler  you  couldn't  mistake.  apparently  august  had 
called the daughters. 

"lily said you'd run off," t. ray said to rosaleen. 
"well, i guess i'm back now," she said. 
"i don't care where the hell you are or where you 

end up," he said to her. "but lily's coming with me." 

even as he said it, i could tell he didn't want me, 
didn't  want  me  back  on  the  farm,  didn't  want  to  be 
reminded of her. another part of him—the good part, if 
there was such a thing—might even be thinking that i'd 
be better off here. 

it  was  pride  now,  all  pride.  how  could  he  back  

down? 

the  front  door  opened,  and  queenie,  violet, 
lunelle,  and  mabelee  stumbled  into  the  house,  all 
wound  up  and  looking  like  they  had  their  clothes  on 
backward. queenie stared at my cheek. 

"everybody all right?" she said, out of breath. 
"we're all right," said august. "this is mr. owens, 

lily's father. he came for a visit." 

"i didn't get an answer at sugar-girl's or cressie's 

house," 

 

427 

queenie  said.  the  four of them  lined  up beside 
us,  clutching their  pocketbooks  up against their  bodies 
like they might have to use them to beat the living hell 
out of somebody. 

i wondered how we must look to him. a bunch of 
women—mabelee four foot ten, lunelle's hair standing 
straight  up  on  her  head  begging  to  be  braided,  violet 
muttering,  "blessed  mary,"  and  queenie—tough  old 
queenie—with her hands on her hips and her lip shoved 
out, every inch of her saying, i double-dog dare you to 
take this girl. 

t. ray sniffed hard and looked at the ceiling. his 
resolve  was  crumbling  all  around  him.  you  could 
practically see bits of it flaking off. 

august  saw 

it,  too.  she  stepped  forward. 
sometimes i forgot how tall she was. "mr. owens, you 
would be doing lily and the rest of us a favor by leaving 
her  here.  i  made  her  my  apprentice  beekeeper,  and 
she's  learning  the  whole  business  and  helping  us  out 
with all her hard work. we love lily, and we'll take care 
of her, i promise you that. we'll start her in school here 
and keep her straight." 

i'd  heard  august  say  more  than  once,  "if  you 
need  something  from  somebody,  always  give  that 
person a way to hand it to you." 

 

428 

t.  ray  needed  a  face-saving  way  to  hand  me 

over, and august was giving it to him. 

my  heart  pounded.  i  watched  him.  he  looked 

once at me, then let his hand drop to his side. 

"good riddance," he said, and moved toward the 
door. we had to open up our little wall of women to let 
him through. 

the  front  door  banged against  the  back  wall  as 
he jerked it open and walked out. we all looked at each 
other and didn't say a word. we seemed to have sucked 
all  the  air  from  the  room  and  were  holding  it  down  in 
our lungs, waiting to be sure we could let it out. 

i  heard  him  crank  the  truck,  and  before  reason 
could  stop  me, i  broke  into  a run, racing  into  the yard 
after him. 

rosaleen called after me, but there was no time 
to  explain.  the  truck  was  backing  along  the  driveway, 
kicking up dirt. i waved my arms. "stop, stop!" 

he  braked,  then  glared  at  me  through  the 
windshield.  behind  me,  august,  rosaleen,  and  the 
daughters rushed onto the front porch. i walked to the 
truck door as he leaned his head out the window. 

"i just have to ask you," i said. 
"what?" 

 

429 

"that  day  my  mother  died,  you  said  when  i 
picked  up  the  gun,  it  went  off."  my  eyes  were  on  his  
eyes. "i need to know," i said. 

"did i do it?" 
the  colors  in  the  yard  shifted  with  the  clouds, 
turned from yellow to light green. he ran his hand across 
his face, stared into his lap, then moved his eyes back to 
me. 

when  he  spoke,  the  roughness  was  gone  from 
his voice. "i could tell you i did it. that's what you wanna 
hear. i could tell you she did it to herself, but both ways 
i'd be lying. it was you who did it, lily. you didn't mean 
it, but it was you." 

he  looked  at  me  a  moment  longer.  then  he  
inched backward out leaving me with the smell of truck 
oil.  the  bees  were  everywhere,  hovering  over  the 
hydrangea  and  the  myrtle  spread  across  the  lawn,  the 
jasmine at the wood's edge, the lemon balm clustered at 
the fence.  maybe  he was  telling me  the truth, but  you 
could never know a hundred percent with t. ray. 

he drove away slowly, not tearing down the road 
like  i  expected.  i  watched  till  he  was  gone  from  sight,  
then turned and looked at august and rosaleen and the 
daughters on the porch. this is the moment i remember 
clearest of all—how i stood in the driveway looking back 

 

430 

at  them.  i  remember  the  sight  of  them  standing  there 
waiting. all these women, all this love, waiting. 

i

 looked  one  last  time  at  the  highway.

 i
remember  thinking  that  he  probably  loved  me  in  his 
own smallish way. he had forfeited me over, hadn't he? 

 

i  still  tell  myself  that  when  he  drove  away  that  
day he wasn't saying good riddance; he was saying, oh, 
lily,  you're  better  off  there  in  that  house  of  colored  
women. you never would've flowered with me like you 
will with them. 

i know that is an absurd thought, but i believe in 
the  goodness  of  imagination.  sometimes  i  imagine  a 
package  will  come  from  him  at  christmastime,  not  the  
same  old  sweater-socks-pajama  routine  but  something 
really 
fourteen-karat-gold  charm 
bracelet, and in his card he will write, "love, t. ray." he 
will  use  the  word  "love,"  and  the  world  will  not  stop 
spinning but go right on in its courses, like the river, like 
the bees, like everything. 

inspired, 

like  a 

a person shouldn't look too far down her nose at 

absurdities. 

look  at  me.  i dived into  one  absurd  thing  after 
another, and here i am in the pink house. i wake up to 
wonder every day. 

• • • 

 

431 

in the autumn south carolina changed her color 
to  ruby  red  and  wild  shades  of  orange.  i  watch  them 
now from my upstairs room, the room june left behind 
when  she  got  married  last  month.  i  could  not  have 
dreamed such a room. august bought me a new bed and 
a dressing table, white french provincial from the sears 
and  roebuck  catalog.  violet  and  queenie  donated  a 
flowered rug that had been laying around in their extra 
room  going  to  waste,  and  mabelee  sewed  blue-and-
white  polka  dot  curtains  for  the  windows  with  fringe 
balls along the hem. cressie crocheted four eight-legged 
octopuses out of various colors of yarn to sit on the bed. 
one  octopus  would  have  been  enough  for  me,  but  it's 
the only handicraft cressie knows how to do, so she just 
keeps doing it. 

lunelle created me a hat that outdid every other 
hat  she'd  ever  made,  including  june's  wedding  hat.  it 
reminds me a little of the pope's hat. it is tall, just goes 
up  into  the  air  and  keeps  going.  it  does  have  more  
roundness  than  the  pope's  hat,  however.  i  expected 
blue, but no, she sewed it in golds  and browns.  i think 
it's supposed to be an old-fashioned beehive. i only wear 
it  to  the  daughters  of  mary  meetings,  since  anywhere 
else it would stop traffic for miles. 

clayton  comes  over  every  week  to  talk  to  us 
about how he's working things out for me and rosaleen 

 

432 

back in sylvan. he says you cannot beat up somebody in 
jail and expect to get away with it. even so, he says, they 
will  drop  all  the  charges  against  me  and  rosaleen  by 
thanksgiving. 

sometimes  clayton  brings  his  daughter  becca 
over  when  he  comes.  she's  a  year  younger  than  me.  i  
always  picture  her  like  she  is  in  the  photograph  in  his 
office,  holding  his  hand,  jumping  a  wave.  i  keep  my 
mother's things on a special shelf in my room, and i let 
becca look at them but not touch. one day i will let her 
pick  them  up,  since  it  seems  that's  what  a  girlfriend 
would do. 

the feeling that they are holy objects is already 
starting to wear off. before long i'll be handing becca my 
mother's  brush,  saying,  "here,  you  wanna  brush  your 
hair with this? you wanna wear this whale pin?" 

becca and i watch for zach in the lunchroom and 
sit with him every chance we get. we have reputations 
as "nigger lovers," which is how it is put to us, and when 
the ignoramuses ball up their notebook paper and throw 
it at zach in the hallway, which seems to be a favorite 
pastime between classes, becca and i are just as likely to 
get  popped  in  the  head  as  he  is.  zach  says  we  should  
walk  on  the  other  side  of  the  hall  from  him.  we  say,  
"balled-up notebook paper—big deal." 

 

433 

in  the  photograph  by  my  bed  my  mother  is 
perpetually  smiling  on  me.  i  guess  i  have  forgiven  us 
both,  although  sometimes  in  the  night  my  dreams  will 
take me back to the sadness, and i have to wake up and 
forgive us again. 

i sit in my new room and write everything down. 
my heart never stops talking. i am the wall keeper now. i 
keep it fed with prayers and  fresh rocks. i  wouldn't  be 
surprised  if  may's  wailing  wall  outlasted  us  all.  at  the 
end  of  time,  when  all  the  world's  buildings  have 
crumbled away, there it will be. 

each day i visit black mary, who looks at me with 
her wise face, older than old and ugly in a beautiful way. 
it seems the crevices run deeper into her body each time 
i see her, that  her wooden skin ages  before my  eyes.  i 
never  get  tired  of  looking  at  her  thick  arm  jutting  out,  
her fist like a bulb about to explode. she is a muscle of 
love, this mary. 

i 

feel  her 

in  unexpected  moments,  her 
assumption into heaven happening in places inside me. 
she will suddenly rise, and when she does, she does not 
go up, up into the sky, but further and further inside me. 
august says she goes into the holes life has gouged out 
of us. 

this  is  the  autumn  of  wonders,  yet  every  day, 
every  single day, i go back to that burned afternoon in 

 

434 

august when t. ray left. i go back to that one moment 
when  i  stood  in  the  driveway  with  small  rocks  and  
clumps  of  dirt  around  my  feet  and  looked  back  at  the 
porch.  and  there  they  were.  all  these  mothers.  i  have 
more  mothers  than  any  eight  girls  off  the  street.  they  
are the moons shining over me. 
 

 

 

435 

acknowlegements 

i  gratefully  acknowledge  the  following  sources, 
not  only  for  the  information  they  offered  me  about 
bees,  beekeeping,  and  honey  making  but  also  for 
providing the epigraph at the beginning of each chapter: 
the dancing bees by karl von frisch, the honey bee by 
james l. gould and carol grant gould, the queen must 
die:  and  other  affairs  of  bees  and  men  by  william 
longgood,  man  and  insects  by  l.  h.  newman,  bees  of 
the world by christopher o'toole and anthony raw, and 
exploring the world of social insects by hilda simon. 

 
 

 

436 

