


Iago
Possibly the most heinous villain in Shakespeare, Iago
is fascinating for his most terrible characteristic: his utter lack
of convincing motivation for his actions. In the first scene, he
claims to be angry at Othello for having passed him over for the
position of lieutenant (I.i. 7-32). At the
end of Act I, scene iii, Iago says he thinks Othello may have slept
with his wife, Emilia: "It is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
/ He has done my office" (I.iii.369-370).
Iago mentions this suspicion again at the end of Act II, scene i,
explaining that he lusts after Desdemona because he wants to get
even with Othello "wife for wife" (II.i.286).
None of these claims seems to adequately explain Iago's deep hatred
of Othello, and Iago's lack of motivation--or his inability or unwillingness
to express his true motivation--makes his actions all the more terrifying.
He is willing to take revenge on anyone--Othello, Desdemona, Cassio,
Roderigo, even Emilia--at the slightest provocation and enjoys the
pain and damage he causes.
Iago is often funny, especially in his scenes with the
foolish Roderigo, which serve as a showcase of Iago's manipulative -abilities.
He seems almost to wink at the audience as he revels in his own
skill. As entertained spectators, we find ourselves on Iago's side when
he is with Roderigo, but the interactions between the two also reveal
a streak of cowardice in Iago--a cowardice that becomes manifest
in the final scene, when Iago kills his own wife (V.ii.231-242). 

Iago's murder of Emilia could also stem from the general
hatred of women that he displays. Some readers have suggested that
Iago's true, underlying motive for persecuting Othello is his homosexual love
for the general. He certainly seems to take great pleasure in preventing
Othello from enjoying marital happiness, and he expresses his love
for Othello frequently and effusively.
It is Iago's talent for understanding and manipulating
the desires of those around him that makes him both a powerful and
a compelling figure. Iago is able to take the handkerchief from
Emilia and know that he can deflect her questions; he is able to
tell Othello of the handkerchief and know that Othello will not
doubt him; he is able to tell the audience, "And what's he then
that says I play the villain," and know that it will laugh as though
he were a clown (II.iii.310). Though the
most inveterate liar, Iago inspires all of the play's characters
the trait that is most lethal to Othello: trust.
