


Miranda
Just under fifteen years old, Miranda is a gentle and
compassionate, but also relatively passive, heroine. From her very
first lines she displays a meek and emotional nature. "O, I have
suffered / With those that I saw suffer!" she says of the shipwreck
(I.ii.5-6), and hearing Prospero's tale of
their narrow escape from Milan, she says "I, not rememb'ring how
I cried out then, / Will cry it o'er again" (I.ii.133-134).
Miranda does not choose her own husband. Instead, while she sleeps,
Prospero sends Ariel to fetch Ferdinand, and arranges things so
that the two will come to love one another. After Prospero has given
the lovers his blessing, he and Ferdinand talk with surprising frankness
about her virginity and the pleasures of the marriage bed while
she stands quietly by. Prospero tells Ferdinand to be sure not to
"break her virgin-knot" before the wedding night (IV.i.15), and
Ferdinand replies with no small anticipation that lust shall never
take away "the edge of that day's celebration" (IV.i.29).
In the play's final scene, Miranda is presented, with Ferdinand,
almost as a prop or piece of the scenery as Prospero draws aside
a curtain to reveal the pair playing chess.
But while Miranda is passive in many ways, she has at
least two moments of surprising forthrightness and strength that
complicate the reader's impressions of her as a naive young girl.
The first such moment is in Act I, scene ii, in which she and Prospero
converse with Caliban. Prospero alludes to the fact that Caliban
once tried to rape Miranda. When Caliban rudely agrees that he intended
to violate her, Miranda responds with impressive vehemence, clearly
appalled at Caliban's light attitude toward his attempted rape.
She goes on to scold him for being ungrateful for her attempts to
educate him: "When thou didst not, savage, / Know thine own meaning,
but wouldst gabble like / A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes /
With words that made them known" (358-361).
These lines are so surprising coming from the mouth of Miranda that
many editors have amended the text and given it to Prospero. This
reattribution seems to give Miranda too little credit. In Act III,
scene i comes the second surprising moment--Miranda's marriage proposal
to Ferdinand: "I am your wife, if you will marry me; / If not, I'll
die your maid" (III.i.83-84). Her proposal
comes shortly after Miranda has told herself to remember her "father's
precepts" (III.i.58) forbidding conversation
with Ferdinand. As the reader can see in her speech to Caliban in
Act I, scene ii, Miranda is willing to speak up for herself about
her sexuality.
