


Caliban

Prospero's dark, earthy slave, frequently referred to
as a monster by the other characters, Caliban is the son of a witch-hag
and the only real native of the island to appear in the play. He
is an extremely complex figure, and he mirrors or parodies several
other characters in the play. In his first speech to Prospero, Caliban
insists that Prospero stole the island from him. Through this speech,
Caliban suggests that his situation is much the same as Prospero's,
whose brother usurped his dukedom. On the other hand, Caliban's
desire for sovereignty of the island mirrors the lust for power
that led Antonio to overthrow Prospero. Caliban's conspiracy with
Stephano and Trinculo to murder Prospero mirrors Antonio and Sebastian's plot
against Alonso, as well as Antonio and Alonso's original conspiracy
against Prospero.
Caliban both mirrors and contrasts with Prospero's other
servant, Ariel. While Ariel is "an airy spirit," Caliban is of the
earth, his speeches turning to "springs, brine pits" (I.ii.341),
"bogs, fens, flats" (II.ii.2), or crabapples
and pignuts (II.ii.159-160). While Ariel
maintains his dignity and his freedom by serving Prospero willingly,
Caliban achieves a different kind of dignity by refusing, if only
sporadically, to bow before Prospero's intimidation.
Surprisingly, Caliban also mirrors and contrasts with
Ferdinand in certain ways. In Act II, scene ii Caliban enters "with
a burden of wood," and Ferdinand enters in Act III, scene i "bearing
a log." Both Caliban and Ferdinand profess an interest in untying Miranda's
"virgin knot." Ferdinand plans to marry her, while Caliban has attempted
to rape her. The glorified, romantic, almost ethereal love of Ferdinand
for Miranda starkly contrasts with Caliban's desire to impregnate
Miranda and people the island with Calibans.
Finally, and most tragically, Caliban becomes
a parody of himself. In his first speech to Prospero, he regretfully
reminds the magician of how he showed him all the ins and outs of
the island when Prospero first arrived. Only a few scenes later,
however, we see Caliban drunk and fawning before a new magical being
in his life: Stephano and his bottle of liquor. Soon, Caliban begs
to show Stephano the island and even asks to lick his shoe. Caliban
repeats the mistakes he claims to curse. In his final act of rebellion,
he is once more entirely subdued by Prospero in the most petty way--he
is dunked in a stinking bog and ordered to clean up Prospero's cell
in preparation for dinner.

Despite his savage demeanor and grotesque appearance,
however, Caliban has a nobler, more sensitive side that the audience
is only allowed to glimpse briefly, and which Prospero and Miranda do
not acknowledge at all. His beautiful speeches about his island home
provide some of the most affecting imagery in the play, reminding
the audience that Caliban really did occupy the island before Prospero
came, and that he may be right in thinking his enslavement to be
monstrously unjust. Caliban's swarthy appearance, his forced servitude,
and his native status on the island have led many readers to interpret
him as a symbol of the native cultures occupied and suppressed by
European colonial societies, which are represented by the power
of Prospero. Whether or not one accepts this allegory, Caliban remains
one of the most intriguing and ambiguous minor characters in all
of Shakespeare, a sensitive monster who allows himself to be transformed
into a fool.
