


Prospero
Prospero is one of Shakespeare's more enigmatic protagonists.
He is a sympathetic character in that he was wronged by his usurping brother,
but his absolute power over the other characters and his overwrought
speeches make him difficult to like. In our first glimpse of him,
he appears puffed up and self-important, and his repeated insistence
that Miranda pay attention suggest that his story is boring her.
Once Prospero moves on to a subject other than his absorption in
the pursuit of knowledge, Miranda's attention is riveted.

The pursuit of knowledge gets Prospero into trouble in
the first place. By neglecting everyday matters when he was duke,
he gave his brother a chance to rise up against him. His possession
and use of magical knowledge renders him extremely powerful and
not entirely sympathetic. His punishments of Caliban are petty and
vindictive, as he calls upon his spirits to pinch Caliban when he
curses. He is defensively autocratic with Ariel. For example, when
Ariel reminds his master of his promise to relieve him of his duties
early if he performs them willingly, Prospero bursts into fury and
threatens to return him to his former imprisonment and torment.
He is similarly unpleasant in his treatment of Ferdinand, leading
him to his daughter and then imprisoning and enslaving him.
Despite his shortcomings as a man, however, Prospero is
central to The Tempest's narrative. Prospero generates
the plot of the play almost single-handedly, as his various schemes,
spells, and manipulations all work as part of his grand design to
achieve the play's happy ending. Watching Prospero work through The
Tempest is like watching a dramatist create a play, building
a story from material at hand and developing his plot so that the
resolution brings the world into line with his idea of goodness
and justice. Many critics and readers of the play have interpreted
Prospero as a surrogate for Shakespeare, enabling the audience to
explore firsthand the ambiguities and ultimate wonder of the creative
endeavor.
Prospero's final speech, in which he likens himself to
a playwright by asking the audience for applause, strengthens this
reading of the play, and makes the play's final scene function as
a moving celebration of creativity, humanity, and art. Prospero
emerges as a more likable and sympathetic figure in the final two
acts of the play. In these acts, his love for Miranda, his forgiveness
of his enemies, and the legitimately happy ending his scheme creates
all work to mitigate some of the undesirable means he has used to
achieve his happy ending. If Prospero sometimes seems autocratic,
he ultimately manages to persuade the audience to share his understanding
of the world--an achievement that is, after all, the final goal of every
author and every play.
