william faulkner
the unvanquished
ambuscade 

behind the smokehouse that summer, ringo and i had a living map. although vicksburg
was just a handful of chips from the woodpile and the river a trench scraped into the
packed earth with the point of a hoe, it (river, city, and terrain) lived, possessing even, in
miniature that ponderable though passive recalcitrance of topography which outweighs
artillery, against which the most brilliant of victories and the most tragic of defeats are but
the loud noises of a moment. to ringo and me it lived, if only because of the fact that the
sunimpacted ground drank water faster than we could fetch it from the well, the very
setting of the stage for conflict a prolonged and well-nigh hopeless ordeal in which we
ran, panting and interminable, with the leaking bucket between wellhouse and battlefield,
the two of us needing first to join forces and spend ourselves against a common enemy,
time, before we could engender between us and hold intact the pattern of re-capitulant
mimic furious victory like a cloth, a shield between ourselves and reality, between us and
fact and doom. this afternoon it seemed as if we would never get it filled, wet enough,
since there had not even been dew in three weeks. but at last it was damp enough,
damp-colored enough at least, and we could begin. we were just about to begin. then
suddenly loosh was standing there, watching us. he was joby's son and ringo's uncle; he
stood there (we did not know where he had come from; we had not seen him appear,
emerge) in the fierce dull early afternoon sunlight, bareheaded, his head slanted a little,
tilted a little yet firm and not askew, like a cannonball (which it resembled) bedded
hurriedly and carelessly in concrete, his eyes a little red at the inner corners as negroes'
eyes get when they have been drinking, looking down at what ringo and i called
vicksburg. then i saw philadelphy, his wife, over at the woodpile, stooped, with an armful
of wood already gathered into the crook of her elbow, watching loosh's back.


"what's that?" loosh said.

"on the way? on the way to what?" "ask your paw. ask marse john." "he's at

"and i tell you nother un you ain't know," he said. "corinth."
"corinth?" i said. philadelphy had dropped the wood and she was coming fast

"there's your vicksburg," he said.
"loosh!" philadelphy said. but loosh squatted, looking at me with that expression on

"vicksburg," i said.

loosh laughed. he stood there laughing, not loud, looking at the chips.


"come on here, loosh," philadelphy said from the woodpile. there was something
curious in her voice too--urgent, perhaps frightened. "if you wants any supper, you better
tote me some wood." but i didn't know which, urgency or fright; i didn't have time to
wonder or speculate, because suddenly loosh stooped before ringo or i could have
moved, and with his hand he swept the chips flat.


his face. i was just twelve then; i didn't know triumph; i didn't even know the word.


toward us. "that's in mississippi too. that's not far. i've been there."

"far don't matter," loosh said. now he sounded as if he were about to chant, to
sing; squatting there with the fierce dull sun on his iron skull and the flattening slant of his
nose, he was not looking at me or ringo either; it was as if his red-cornered eyes had
reversed in his skull and it was the blank flat obverses of the balls which we saw. "far don't
matter. case hit's on the way!"

tennessee, fighting. i can't ask him." "you think he at tennessee? ain't no need for him at
tennessee now." then philadelphy grabbed him by the arm.

and get me some wood!"

ruined vicksburg, our tedious hoe-scratch not even damp-colored now, looking at one
another quietly. "what?" ringo said. "what he mean?"


laughed at corinth too. what you reckon he know that we ain't?"
"nothing!" i said. "do you reckon loosh knows anything that father don't know?"

"marse john at tennessee. maybe he ain't know either."


"do you reckon he'd be away off at tennessee if there were yankees at corinth?
do you reckon that if there were yankees at corinth, father and general van dorn and
general pemberton all three wouldn't be there too?" but i was just talking too, i knew that,
because niggers know, they know things; it would have to be something louder, much
louder, than words to do any good. so i stooped and caught both hands full of dust and
rose: and ringo still standing there, not moving, just looking at me even as i flung the dust.
"i'm general pemberton!" i cried. "yaaay! yaay!" stooping and catching up more dust and
flinging that too. still ringo didn't move. "all right!" i cried. "i'll be grant this time, then. you
can be general pemberton." because it was that urgent, since negroes knew. the
arrangement was that i would be general pemberton twice in succession and ringo
would be grant, then i would have to be grant once so ringo could be general
pemberton or he wouldn't play anymore. but now it was that urgent even though ringo

"hush your mouth, nigger!" she cried, in that tense desperate voice. "come on here

then they were gone. ringo and i didn't watch them go. we stood there above our

"nothing," i said. i stooped and set vicksburg up again. "there it is."
but ringo didn't move, he just looked at me. "loosh laughed. he say corinth too. he

was a nigger too, because ringo and i had been born in the same month and had both
fed at the same breast and had slept together and eaten together for so long that ringo
called granny 'granny' just like i did, until maybe he wasn't a nigger anymore or maybe i
wasn't a white boy anymore, the two of us neither, not even people any longer: the two
supreme undefeated like two moths, two feathers riding above a hurricane. so we were
both at it; we didn't see louvinia, joby's wife and ringo's grandmother, at all. we were
facing one another at scarcely arms' length, to the other each invisible in the furious slow
jerking of the flung dust, yelling "kill the bastuds! kill them! kill them!" when her voice
seemed to descend upon us like an enormous hand, flattening the very dust which we
had raised, leaving us now visible to one another, dust-colored ourselves to the eyes and
still in the act of throwing:
"you, bayard! you, ringo!" she stood about ten feet away, her mouth still open with

shouting. i noticed that she did not now have on the old hat of father's which she wore on
top of her head rag even when she just stepped out of the kitchen for wood. "what was
that word?" she said. "what did i hear you say?" only she didn't wait to be answered, and
then i saw that she had been running too. "look who coming up the big road!" she said.

we--ringo and i--ran as one, in midstride out of frozen immobility, across the back
yard and around the house, where granny was standing at the top of the front steps and
where loosh had just come around the house from the other side and stopped, looking
down the drive toward the gate. in the spring, when father came home that time, ringo
and i ran down the drive to meet him and return, i standing in one stirrup with father's arm
around me, and ringo holding to the other stirrup and running beside the horse. but this
time we didn't. i mounted the steps and stood beside granny, and with ringo and loosh
on the ground below the gallery we watched the claybank stallion enter the gate which
was never closed now, and come up the drive. we watched them--the big gaunt horse
almost the color of smoke, lighter in color than the dust which had gathered and caked
on his wet hide where they had crossed at the ford three miles away, coming up the drive
at a steady gait which was not a walk and not a run, as if he had held it all the way from
tennessee because there was a need to encompass earth which abrogated sleep or rest
and relegated to some insulated bourne of perennial and pointless holiday so trivial a
thing as galloping; and father damp too from the ford, his boots dark and dustcaked too,
the skirts of his weathered gray coat shades darker than the breast and back and sleeves
where the tarnished buttons and the frayed braid of his field officer's rank glinted dully, the
sabre hanging loose yet rigid at his side as if it were too heavy to jounce or perhaps were
attached to the living thigh itself and took no more motion from the horse than he did. he
stopped; he looked at granny and me on the porch and at ringo and loosh on the
ground. "well, miss rosa," he said. "well, boys." "well, john," granny said. loosh came and
took jupiter's head; father dismounted stiffly, the sabre clashing dully and heavily against
his wet boot and leg. "curry him," father said. "give him a good feed, but don't turn him
into the pasture. let him stay in the lot. . . . go with loosh," he said, as if jupiter were a
child, slapping him on the flank as loosh led him on. then we could see him good. i mean,
father. he was not big; it was just the things he did, that we knew he was doing, had been
doing in virginia and tennessee, that made him seem big to us. there were others besides
him that were doing the things, the same things, but maybe it was because he was the
only one we knew, had ever heard snoring at night in a quiet house, had watched eating,
had heard when he talked, knew how he liked to sleep and what he liked to eat and how
he liked to talk. he was not big, yet somehow he looked even smaller on the horse than off
of him, because jupiter was big and when you thought of father you thought of him as
being big too and so when you thought of father being on jupiter it was as if you said.

"i've been expecting you," granny said.
"ah," father said. then he looked at me, who was still looking at him, as ringo at the

"you rode hard from tennessee," i said.
"ah," father said again.
"tennessee sho gaunted you," ringo said. "what does they eat up there, marse

'together they will be too big; you won't believe it.' so you didn't believe it and so it wasn't.
he came toward the steps and began to mount, the sabre heavy and flat at his side. then
i began to smell it again, like each time he returned, like the day back in the spring when i
rode up the drive standing in one of his stirrups--that odor in his clothes and beard and
flesh too which i believed was the smell of powder and glory, the elected victorious but
know better now: know now to have been only the will to endure, a sardonic and even
humorous declining of self-delusion which is not even kin to that optimism which believes
that that which is about to happen to us can possibly be the worst which we can suffer. he
mounted four of the steps, the sabre (that's how tall he actually was) striking against each
one on the steps as he mounted, then he stopped and removed his hat. and that's what i
mean: about his doing bigger things than he was. he could have stood on the same level
with granny and he would have only needed to bend his head a little for her to kiss him.
but he didn't. he stopped two steps below her, with his head bared and his forehead held
for her to touch her lips to, and the fact that granny had to stoop a little now took nothing
from the illusion of height and size which he wore for us at least.


foot of the steps beneath still was.



john? does they eat the same things that folks eat?"

been at tennessee."


have time to wash."


2

that afternoon we built the stock pen. we built it deep in the creek bottom, where you
could not have found it unless you had known where to look, and you could not have
seen it until you came to the new sap-sweating, axe-ended rails woven through and into
the jungle growth itself. we were all there--father and joby and ringo and loosh and me--
father in the boots still but with his coat off now, so that we saw for the first time that his
trousers were not confederate ones but were yankee ones, of new strong blue cloth,
which they (he and his troop) had captured, and without the sabre now too. we worked
fast, felling the saplings--the willow and pin oak, the swamp maple and chinkapin--and,
without even waiting hardly to trim them, dragging them behind the mules and by hand
too, through the mud and the briers to where father waited. and that was it too; father
was everywhere, with a sapling under each arm going through the brush and briers almost
faster than the mules; racking the rails into place while joby and loosh were still arguing
about which end of the rail went where. that was it: not that father worked faster and

then i said it, looking him in the face while he looked at me: "loosh says you haven't

"loosh?" father said. "loosh?"
"come in," granny said. "louvinia is putting your dinner on the table. you will just

harder than anyone else, even though you do look bigger (to twelve, at least, to me and
ringo at twelve, at least) standing still and saying, 'do this or that' to the ones who are
doing; it was the way he did it. when he sat at his old place at the table in the diningroom
and finished the side meat and greens and the cornbread and milk which louvinia
brought him (and we watching and waiting, ringo and i at least, waiting for night and the
talking, the telling) and wiped his beard and said, "now we're going to build a new pen.
we'll have to cut the rails, too"; when he said that, ringo and i probably had exactly the
same vision. there would be all of us there--joby and loosh and ringo and me on the
edge of the bottom and drawn up into a kind of order--an order partaking not of any
lusting and sweating for assault or even victory, but rather of that passive yet dynamic
affirmation which napoleon's troops must have felt--and facing us, between us and the
bottom, between us and the waiting sap-running boles which were about to be
transposed into dead rails, father. he was on jupiter now; he wore the frogged gray field-
officer's tunic; and while we watched he drew the sabre. giving us a last embracing and
comprehensive glance he drew it, already pivoting jupiter on the tight snaffle; his hair
tossed beneath the cocked hat, the sabre flashed and glinted; he cried, not loud yet
stentorian: "trot! canter! charge!" then, without even having to move, we could both
watch and follow him--the little man (who in conjunction with the horse looked exactly the
right size because that was as big as he needed to look and--to twelve years old--bigger
than most folks could hope to look) standing in the stirrups above the smoke-colored
diminishing thunderbolt, beneath the arcy and myriad glitter of the sabre from which the
chosen saplings, sheared trimmed and lopped, sprang into neat and waiting windrows,
requiring only the carrying and the placing to become a fence. the sun had gone out of
the bottom when we finished the fence, that is, left joby and loosh with the last three
panels to put up, but it was still shining up the slope of the pasture when we rode across it, i
behind father on one of the mules and ringo on the other one. but it was gone even from
the pasture by the time i had left father at the house and returned to the stable, where
ringo already had a lead rope on the cow. so we went back to the new pen, with the
calf following nuzzling and prodding at the cow every time she stopped to snatch a
mouthful of grass, and the sow trotting on ahead. she (the sow) was the one who moved
slow. she seemed to be moving slower than the cow even while the cow was stopped
with ringo leaned to the taut jerk of the rope and hollering at the cow, so it was dark sure
enough when we reached the new pen. but there was still plenty of gap left to drive the
stock through. but then, we never had worried about that.

we drove them in--the two mules, the cow and calf, the sow; we put up the last
panel by feel, and went back to the house. it was full dark now, even in the pasture; we
could see the lamp in the kitchen and the shadow of someone moving across the
window. when ringo and i came in, louvinia was just closing one of the big trunks from the
attic, which hadn't been down stairs since the christmas four years ago which we spent at
hawkhurst, when there wasn't any war and uncle dennison was still alive. it was a big trunk
and heavy even when empty; it had not been in the kitchen when we left to build the pen
so it had been fetched down some time during the afternoon, while joby and loosh were
in the bottom and nobody there to carry it down but granny and louvinia, and then
father later, after we came back to the house on the mule, so that was a part of the need
and urgency too; maybe it was father who carried the trunk down from the attic too. and
when i went in to supper, the table was set with the kitchen knives and forks in place of the
silver ones, and the sideboard (on which the silver service had been sitting when i began
to remember and where it had been sitting ever since except on each tuesday afternoon,

but we were just twelve; we didn't listen to that. what ringo and i heard was the

when granny and louvinia and philadelphy would polish it, why, nobody except granny
maybe knew, since it was never used, was bare.

it didn't take us long to eat. father had already eaten once early in the afternoon,
and besides that was what ringo and i were waiting for: for after supper, the hour of laxed
muscles and full entrails, the talking. in the spring when he came home that time, we
waited as we did now, until he was sitting in his old chair with the hickory logs popping and
snapping on the hearth and ringo and i squatting on either side of the hearth, beneath
the mantel above which the captured musket which he had brought home from virginia
two years ago rested on two pegs, loaded and oiled for service. then we listened. we
heard: the names--forrest and morgan and barksdale and van dorn; the words like gap
and run which we didn't have in mississippi even though we did own barksdale, and van
dorn until somebody's husband killed him, and one day general forrest rode down south
street in oxford where there watched him through a window pane a young girl who
scratched her name on it with a diamond ring: celia cook.

cannon and the flags and the anonymous yelling. that's what we intended to hear
tonight. ringo was waiting for me in the hall; we waited until father was settled in his chair
in the room which he and the negroes called the office--father because his desk was
here in which he kept the seed cotton and corn and in this room he would remove his
muddy boots and sit in his stocking feet while the boots dried on the hearth and where the
dogs could come and go with impunity, to lie on the rug before the fire or even to sleep
there on the cold nights--these whether mother, who died when i was born, gave him this
dispensation before she died or whether granny carried it on afterward or whether granny
gave him the dispensation herself because mother died i don't know: and the negroes
called the office because into this room they would be fetched to face the patroller
(sitting in one of the straight hard chairs and smoking one of father's cigars too but with his
hat off) and swear that they could not possibly have been either whom or where he (the
patroller) said they were--and which granny called the library because there was one
bookcase in it containing a coke upon littleton, a josephus, a koran, a volume of
mississippi reports dated 1848, a jeremy taylor, a napoleon's maxims, a thousand and
ninety-eight page treatise on astrology, a history of werewolf men in england, ireland and
scotland and including wales by the reverend ptolemy thorndyke, m.a. (edinburgh),
f.r.s.s., a complete walter scott, a complete fenimore cooper, a paper-bound dumas
complete, too, save for the volume which father lost from his pocket at manassas
(retreating, he said).

so ringo and i squatted again and waited quietly while granny sewed beside the
lamp on the table and father sat in his old chair in its old place, his muddy boots crossed
and lifted into the old heel-marks beside the cold and empty fireplace, chewing the
tobacco which joby had loaned him. joby was a good deal older than father. he was
too old to have been caught short of tobacco just by a war. he had come to mississippi
from carolina with father and he had been father's body servant all the time that he was
raising and training simon, ringo's father, to take over when he (joby) got too old, which
was to have been some years yet except for the war. so simon went with father; he was
still in tennessee with the army. we waited for father to begin; we waited so long that we
could tell from the sounds that louvinia was almost through in the kitchen: so that i
decided father was waiting for louvinia to finish and come in to hear too, so i said, "how
can you fight in mountains, father?"

"is the trunk ready?" "yes sir. hit's ready."
"then tell loosh to get the lantern and the shovels and wait in the kitchen for me."
"yes sir," louvinia said. she came out; she crossed the hall again without even


because he said, "you can't. you just have to. now you boys run on to bed." we went up
the stairs. but not all the way; we stopped and sat on the top step, just out of the light from
the hall lamp, watching the door to the office, listening; after a while louvinia crossed the
hall without looking up and entered the office; we could hear father and her:



looking up the stairs, who used to follow us up and stand in the bedroom door and scold
at us until we were in bed--i in the bed itself, ringo on the pallet beside it. but this time she
not only didn't wonder where we were, she didn't even think about where we might not
be.
"i knows what's in that trunk," ringo whispered.

"hit's the silver. what you reckon--"


"shhhh," i said. we could hear father's voice, talking to granny. after a while
louvinia came back and crossed the hall again. we sat on the top step, listening to
father's voice telling granny and louvinia both.

"vicksburg?" ringo whispered. we were in the shadow; i couldn't see anything but
his eyeballs. "vicksburg fell? do he mean hit fell off in the river? with ginrul pemberton in
hit too?"

"shhhhh!" i said. we sat close together in the shadow, listening to father. perhaps it
was the dark or perhaps we were the two moths, the two feathers again or perhaps there
is a point at which credulity firmly and calmly and irrevocably declines, because suddenly
louvinia was standing over us, shaking us awake. she didn't even scold us. she followed us
up stairs and stood in the door to the bedroom and she didn't even light the lamp; she
couldn't have told whether or not we had undressed even if she had been paying enough
attention to suspect that we had not. she may have been listening as ringo and i were, to
what we thought we heard, though i knew better, just as i knew that we had slept on the
stairs for some time; i was telling myself, 'they have already carried it out, they are in the
orchard now, digging.' because there is that point at which credulity declines; somewhere
between waking and sleeping i believed i saw or i dreamed that i did see the lantern in
the orchard, under the apple trees. but i don't know whether i saw it or not, because then
it was morning and it was raining and father was gone.


3

he must have ridden off in the rain, which was still falling at breakfast and then at
dinnertime too, so that it looked as if we wouldn't have to leave the house at all, until at
last granny put the sewing away and said, "very well. get the cook book, marengo."
ringo got the cook book from the kitchen and he and i lay on our stomachs on the floor
while granny opened the book. "what shall we read about today?" she said.


and that's what he was waiting for, though not in the way ringo and i thought,

"read about cake," i said.

"very well. what kind of cake?" only she didn't need to say that because ringo was

"cokynut cake, granny." he said coconut cake every time because we never had

"i reckon a little more won't hurt us," granny said.
the rain stopped in the middle of the afternoon; the sun was shining when i stepped

"that's all. to watch him. that he would know before we did. father said that

"watch him," i said.
"watch him? watch who?" i looked at ringo. he was staring at me, his eyeballs


already answering that before she spoke:

been able to decide whether ringo had ever tasted coconut cake or not. we had had
some that christmas before it started and ringo had tried to remember whether they had
had any of it in the kitchen or not, but he couldn't remember. now and then i used to try
to help him decide, get him to tell me how it tasted and what it looked like and sometimes
he would almost decide to risk it before he would change his mind. because he said that
he would rather just maybe have tasted coconut cake without remembering it than to
know for certain he had not; that if he were to describe the wrong kind of cake, he would
never taste coconut cake as long as he lived.


out onto the back gallery, with ringo already saying, "where we going?" behind me and
still saying it after we passed the smokehouse where i could see the stable and the cabins:
"where we going now?" before we reached the stable joby and loosh came into sight
beyond the pasture fence, bringing the mules up from the new pen. "what we gwy do
now?" ringo said.


white and quiet like last night. "you talking about loosh. who tole us to watch him?"



knows."

breath he answered it himself, staring at me with his round quiet eyes, blinking a little:
"yestiddy. vicksburg. when he knocked it over. he knowed it then, already. like when he
said marse john wasn't at no tennessee and sho enough marse john wasn't. go on; what
else did the dream tole you?"

louvinia would have to watch him too, that even if he was her son, she would have to be
white a little while longer. because if we watched him, we could tell by what he did when
it was getting ready to happen."



hit can't be a lie case ain't nobody there to tole hit to you. so we got to watch him."

the pasture to where they had been cutting wood. we watched them for two days,
hidden. we realized then what a close watch louvinia had kept on us all the time.
sometimes while we were hidden watching loosh and joby load the wagon, we would
hear her yelling at us, and we would have to sneak away and then run to let louvinia find

"when what was getting ready to happen?"
"i don't know." ringo breathed deep, once.
"then hit's so," he said. "if somebody tole you, hit could be a lie. but if you dremp hit,

"nobody. i just know."
"bayard, did you dream hit?"
"yes. last night. it was father and louvinia. father said to watch loosh, because he

"knows?" ringo said. "knows what?" but he didn't need to ask that either; in the next

we followed them when they put the mules to the wagon and went down beyond

so we were outside of his and philadelphy's cabin that night when he came out.

us coming from the other direction. sometimes she would even meet us before we had
time to circle, and ringo hiding behind me then while she scolded at us: "what devilment
yawl into now? yawl up to something. what is it?" but we didn't tell her, and we would
follow her back to the kitchen while she scolded at us over her shoulder, and when she
was inside the house we would move quietly until we were out of sight again, and then run
back to hide and watch loosh.

we followed him down to the new pen and heard him catch the mule and ride away. we
ran, but when we reached the road, too, we could only hear the mule loping, dying
away. but we had come a good piece, because even louvinia calling us sounded faint
and small. we looked up the road in the starlight, after the mule. "that's where corinth is," i
said.

he didn't get back until after dark the next day. we stayed close to the house and
watched the road by turns, to get louvinia calmed down in case it would be late before
he got back. it was late; she had followed us up to bed and we had slipped out again; we
were just passing joby's cabin when the door opened and loosh kind of surged up out of
the darkness right beside us. he was almost close enough for me to have touched him and
he did not see us at all; all of a sudden he was just kind of hanging there against the
lighted doorway like he had been cut out of tin in the act of running and was inside the
cabin and the door shut back again almost before we knew what we had seen. and
when we looked in the window he was standing in front of the fire, with his clothes torn and
muddy where he had been hiding in swamps and bottoms from the patrollers and with
that look on his face again which resembled drunkenness but was not, as if he had not
slept in a long time and did not want to sleep now, and joby and philadelphy leaning into
the firelight and looking at him and philadelphy's mouth open too and the same look on
her face. then i saw louvinia standing in the door. we had not heard her behind us yet
there she was, with one hand on the door jamb, looking at loosh, and again she didn't
have on father's old hat.


joby said. "hush up, loosh!" "yes!" loosh said, "gin'ral sherman gonter sweep the earth and
the race gonter all be free!"

then louvinia crossed the floor in two steps and hit loosh across the head hard with
her flat hand. "you black fool!" she said. "do you think there's enough yankees in the whole
world to whip the white folks?" we ran to the house, we didn't wait for louvinia; again we
didn't know that she was behind us. we ran into the room where granny was sitting beside
the lamp with the bible open on her lap and her neck arched to look at us across her
spectacles. "they're coming here!" i said. "they're coming to set us free!" "what?" she said.

"loosh saw them! they're just down the road. it's general sherman and he's going
to make us all free!" and we watching her, waiting to see who she would send for to take
down the musket--whether it would be joby, because he was the oldest, or loosh,
because he had seen them and would know what to shoot at. then she shouted, too, and
her voice was strong and loud as louvinia's:
"you bayard sartoris! ain't you in bed yet? . . . louvinia!" she shouted. louvinia came

in. "take these children up to bed, and if you hear another sound out of them tonight, you
have my permission and my insistence, too, to whip them both."

"you mean they gwinter free us all?" philadelphy said.
"yes," loosh said, loud, with his head flung back; he didn't even look at joby when

it didn't take us long to get to bed. but we couldn't talk, because louvinia was

"look like hit haf to be us," he said.
"are you scared?"
"i ain't very," he said. "i just wish marse john was here."
"well, he's not," i said. "it'll have to be us."
we watched the road for two days, lying in the cedar copse. now and then


going to bed on the cot in the hall. and ringo was afraid to come up in the bed with me,
so i got down on the pallet with him. "we'll have to watch the road," i said. ringo
whimpered.





louvinia hollered at us, but we told her where we were and that we were making another
map, and besides, she could see the cedar copse from the kitchen. it was cool and shady
there, and quiet, and ringo slept most of the time, and i slept some too. i was dreaming--it
was like i was looking at our place and suddenly the house and stable and cabins and
trees and all were gone and i was looking at a place flat and empty as the sideboard,
and it was growing darker and darker, and then all of a sudden i wasn't looking at it; i was
there--a sort of frightened drove of little tiny figures moving on it; they were father and
granny and joby and louvinia and loosh and philadelphy and ringo and me--and then
ringo made a choked sound and i was looking at the road, and there in the middle of it,
sitting on a bright bay horse and looking at the house through a field glass, was a yankee.
for a long time we just lay there looking at him. i don't know what we had expected to
see, but we knew what he was at once; i remember thinking, "he looks just like a man,"
and then ringo and i were glaring at each other, and then we were crawling backward
down the hill without remembering when we started to crawl, and then we were running
across the pasture toward the house without remembering when we got to our feet. we
seemed to run forever, with our heads back and our fists clenched, before we reached
the fence and fell over it and ran on into the house. granny's chair was empty beside the
table where her sewing lay. "quick!" i said. "shove it up here!" but ringo didn't move; his
eyes looked like door knobs while i dragged the chair up and climbed onto it and began
to lift down the musket. it weighed about fifteen pounds, though it was not the weight so
much as the length; when it came free, it and the chair and all went down with a
tremendous clatter. we heard granny sit up in her bed upstairs, and then we heard her
voice: "who is it?"




said. "do you want to be free?"

grove toward the road and ducked down behind the honeysuckle just as the horse came
around the curve. we didn't hear anything else, maybe because of our own breathing or
maybe because we were not expecting to hear anything else. we didn't look again
either; we were too busy cocking the musket. we had practiced before, once or twice
when granny was not there and joby would come in to examine it and change the cap
on the nipple. ringo held it up and i took the barrel in both hands, high, and drew myself
up and shut my legs about it and slid down over the hammer until it clicked. that's what

"quick!" i said. "hurry!"
"i'm scared," ringo said.
"you, bayard!" granny said. . . . "louvinia!"
we held the musket between us like a log of wood. "do you want to be free?" i

we carried it that way, like a log, one at each end, running. we ran through the

"we shot him, granny!" i cried. "we shot the bastud!"
"what?" she looked at me, her face the same color as her hair almost, her

we were doing, we were too busy to look; the musket was already riding up across ringo's
back as he stooped, his hands on his knees and panting, "shoot the bastud! shoot him!"
and then the sights came level, and as i shut my eyes i saw the man and the bright horse
vanish in smoke. it sounded like thunder and it made as much smoke as a brush fire, and i
heard the horse scream, but i didn't see anything else; it was ringo wailing, "great god,
bayard! hit's the whole army!"


4

the house didn't seem to get any nearer; it just hung there in front of us, floating and
increasing slowly in size, like something in a dream, and i could hear ringo moaning
behind me, and farther back still the shouts and the hoofs. but we reached the house at
last; louvinia was just inside the door, with father's old hat on her head rag and her mouth
open, but we didn't stop. we ran on into the room where granny was standing beside the
righted chair, her hand at her chest.


spectacles shining against her hair above her forehead. "bayard sartoris, what did you
say?"

never saw them, and now they are coming."

voice was strong as ever:

"what's this? you, marengo! what have you done?"

"we shot the bastud, granny!" ringo said. "we kilt him!"

then louvinia was there, too, with her mouth still open, too, and her face like
somebody had thrown ashes at her. only it didn't need her face; we heard the hoofs
jerking and sliding in the dirt, and one of them hollering, "get around to the back there,
some of you!" and we looked up and saw them ride past the window--the blue coats and
the guns. then we heard the boots and spurs on the porch.

had to stand there looking at granny with her hand at her breast and her face looking like
she had died and her voice like she had died too.

"louvinia! what is this? what are they trying to tell me?" that's how it happened--like
when once the musket decided to go off, all that was to occur afterward tried to rush into
the sound of it all at once. i could still hear it, my ears were still ringing, so that granny and
ringo and i all seemed to be talking far away. then she said, "quick! here!" and then ringo
and i were squatting with our knees under our chins, on either side of her against her legs,
with the hard points of the chair rockers jammed into our backs and her skirts spread over
us like a tent, and the heavy feet coming in and--louvinia told us afterward--the yankee
sergeant shaking the musket at granny and saying "come on, grandma! where are they!
we saw them run in here!"

"granny!" i said. "granny!" but it seemed like none of us could move at all; we just

"we killed him, granny! at the gate! only there was the whole army, too, and we

she sat down; she dropped into the chair, hard, her hand at her breast. but her

"don't you worry about that; i'm going to. . . . send some of the boys upstairs," he

"you won't find any locked doors," granny said. "at least, let me ask you--"
"don't you ask anything, grandma. you set still. better for you if you had done a little

"was there--" we could hear her voice die away and then speak again, like she was

"dead? hell, yes! broke his back and we had to shoot him!"
"had to--you had--shoot--" i didn't know horrified astonishment either, but ringo and

"yes, by god! had to shoot him! the best horse in the whole army! the whole

we couldn't see; we just squatted in a kind of fain gray light and that smell of

"you mean you deny ever having seen this gun before?"
"i do." it was that quiet; she didn't move at all, sitting bolt upright and right on the


granny that her clothes and bed and room all had, and ringo's eyes lookin like two plates
of chocolate pudding and maybe both of us thinking how granny had never whipped us
for anything in our lives except lying, and that even when it wasn't even a told lie, but just
keeping quiet, how she would whip us first and then make us kneel down an kneel down
with us herself to ask the lord to forgive us.

"you are mistaken," she said. "there are no children in this house nor on this place.
there is no one here at all except my servant and myself and the people in the quarters."


edge of the chair, to keep her skirts spread over us. "if you doubt me, you may search the
house."

said. "if you find any locked doors, you know what to do. and tell them fellows out back to
comb the barn and the cabins too."


asking before you sent them little devils out with this gun."

behind it with a switch, making it talk. "is he--it--the one who--"


granny and i were all three it.

regiment betting on him for next sunday--" he said some more, but we were not listening.
we were not breathing either, glaring at each other in the gray gloom, and i was almost
shouting, too, until granny said it:



breaths for a long time without knowing it, and that now we could let go and breathe
again. maybe that was why we never heard the other man, when he came in, at all; it
was louvinia that saw that, too--a colonel, with a bright short beard and hard bright gray
eyes, who looked at granny sitting in the chair with her hand at her breast, and took off his
hat. only he was talking to the sergeant.



and pleasant. "by whose authority?"

we could just hear the sound; it was louvinia that told us how he shook the musket and
banged the butt on the floor.

"what's this?" he said. "what's going on here, harrison?"
"this is where they run to," the sergeant said. "i'm searching the house."
"ah," the colonel said. he didn't sound mad at all. he just sounded cold and short

"didn't--they didn't--oh, thank god! thank god!"
"we didn't--" ringo said.
"hush!" i said. because we didn't have to say it, it was like we had had to hold our

"well, somebody here fired on united states troops. i guess this is authority enough."

"ah," said the colonel. and louvinia said how he looked at granny now for the first

"there are none, sir," granny said.
louvinia said he looked back at the sergeant. "there are no children here,

"ah," the colonel said. "i see. well? have you found them?"
"we ain't yet. but these rebels are like rats when it comes to hiding. she says that

"and killed one horse," the colonel said.


"it was a united states horse. i heard the general say myself that if he had enough
horses, he wouldn't always care whether there was anybody to ride them or not. and so
here we are, riding peaceful along the road, not bothering nobody yet, and these two
little devils--the best horse in the army; the whole regiment betting--"


there ain't even any children here."

time. she said how she could see his eyes going from granny's face down to where her
skirt was spread, and looking at her skirt for a whole minute and then going back to her
face. and that granny gave him look for look while she lied. "do i understand, madam,
that there are no children in or about this house?"


sergeant. evidently the shot came from somewhere else. you may call the men in and
mount them."
"but, colonel, we saw them two kids run in here! all of us saw them!"


"didn't you just hear this lady say there are no children here? where are your ears,
sergeant? or do you really want the artillery to overtake us, with a creek bottom not five
miles away to be got over?"


more concerned about getting another horse to protect my wager next sunday than over
a grandchildless old lady"--louvinia said his eyes just kind of touched granny now and
flicked away--"alone in a house which, in all probability--and for her pleasure and
satisfaction, i am ashamed to say, i hope--i shall never see again. mount your men and get
along."

we squatted there, not breathing, and heard them leave the house; we heard the
sergeant calling the men up from the barn and we heard them ride away. but we did not
move yet, because granny's body had not relaxed at all, and so we knew that the
colonel was still there, even before he spoke--the voice short, brisk, hard, with that
something of laughing behind it: "so you have no grandchildren. what a pity in a place
like this which two boys would enjoy--sports, fishing, game to shoot at, perhaps the most
exciting game of all, and none the less so for being, possibly, a little rare this near the
house. and with a gun--a very dependable weapon, i see." louvinia said how the
sergeant had set the musket in the corner and how the colonel looked at it now, and now
we didn't breathe. "though i understand that this weapon does not belong to you. which is
just as well. because if it were your weapon--which it is not--and you had two grandsons, or
say a grandson and a negro playfellow--which you have not--and if this were the first time-
-which it is not--someone next time might be seriously hurt. but what am i doing? trying
your patience by keeping you in that uncomfortable chair while i waste my time delivering
a homily suitable only for a lady with grandchildren--or one grandchild and a negro
companion." now he was about to go, too; we could tell it even beneath the skirt; this
time it was granny herself:

"well, sir, you're colonel. but if it was me was colo--"
"then, doubtless, i should be sergeant harrison. in which case, i think i should be

"there is little of refreshment i can offer you, sir. but if a glass of cool milk after your

only, for a long time he didn't answer at all; louvinia said how he just looked at

"louvinia," granny said, "conduct the gentleman to the diningroom and serve him


ride--"

granny with his hard bright eyes and that hard bright silence full of laughing. "no, no," he
said. "i thank you. you are taxing yourself beyond mere politeness and into sheer bravado."

with what we have."

he was out of the room now, because granny began to tremble now, trembling
and trembling, but not relaxing, yet; we could hear her panting now. and we breathed,
too, now, looking at each other. "we never killed him!" i whispered. "we haven't killed
anybody at all!" so it was granny's body that told us again; only this time i could almost
feel him looking at granny's spread skirt where we crouched while he thanked her for the
milk and told her his name and regiment.

"perhaps it is just as well that you have no grandchildren," he said. "since, doubtless,
you wish to live in peace. i have three boys myself, you see. and i have not even had time
to become a grandparent." and now there wasn't any laughing behind his voice, and
louvinia said he was standing there in the door, with the brass bright on his dark blue and
his hat in his hand and his bright beard and hair, looking at granny without the laughing
now: "i won't apologize; fools cry out at wind or fire. but permit me to say and hope that
you will never have anything worse than this to remember us by." then he was gone. we
heard his spurs in the hall and on the porch, then the horse, dying away, ceasing, and
then granny let go. she went back into the chair with her hand at her breast and her eyes
closed and the sweat on her face in big drops; all of a sudden i began to holler, "louvinia!
louvinia!" but she opened her eyes then and looked at me; they were looking at me when
they opened. then she looked at ringo for a moment, but she looked back at me,
panting.


lying back in the chair, looking at me and panting.


answer, but i could feel her looking at me; i said suddenly: "and you told a lie. you said we
were not here."

"i know it," she said. she moved. "help me up." she got out of the chair, holding to
us. we didn't know what she was trying to do. we just stood there while she held to us and
to the chair and let herself down to her knees beside it. it was ringo that knelt first. then i
knelt, too, while she asked the lord to forgive her for telling the lie. then she rose; we didn't
have time to help her. "go to the kitchen and get a pan of water and the soap," she said.
"get the new soap."


5


"bayard," she said, "what was that word you used?"
"word?" i said. "when, granny?" then i remembered; i didn't look at her, and she

"don't repeat it. you cursed. you used obscene language, bayard."
i didn't look at her. i could see ringo's feet too. "ringo did too," i said. she didn't

"yonder they," he said, spitting. "yonder hit. tennessee, where marse john use to

"too far to go just to fight yankees," i said, spitting too. but it was gone now--the

it was late, as if time had slipped up on us while we were still caught, enmeshed by the
sound of the musket and were too busy to notice it; the sun shone almost level into our
faces while we stood at the edge of the back gallery, spitting, rinsing the soap from our
mouths turn and turn about from the gourd dipper, spitting straight into the sun. for a while,
just by breathing we could blow soap bubbles, but soon it was just the taste of the spitting.
then even that began to go away although the impulse to spit did not, while away to the
north we could see the cloud bank, fault and blue and faraway at the base and touched
with copper sun along the crest. when father came home in the spring, we tried to
understand about mountains. at last he pointed out the cloud bank to tell us what
mountains looked like. so ever since then ringo believed that the cloud-bank was
tennessee.

fight um at. looking mighty far, too."

suds, the glassy weightless iridescent bubbles; even the taste of it.


retreat

in the afternoon loosh drove the wagon up beside the back gallery and took the mules
out; by supper-time we had everything loaded into the wagon but the bedclothes we
would sleep under that night. then granny went up stairs and when she came back down
she had on her sunday black silk and her hat, and there was color in her face now and her
eyes were bright.

the morning."

anywhere; i reckon the lord will forgive me for getting ready one day ahead of time." she
turned (we were in the dining-room then, the table set with supper) to louvinia. "tell joby
and loosh to be ready with the lantern and the shovels as soon as they have finished
eating."

and looked at granny. "you mean you gonter take that heavy trunk all the way to
memphis with you? you gonter dig hit up from where hit been hid safe since last summer,
and take hit all the way to memphis?"

"yes," granny said. "i am following colonel sartoris' instructions as i believe he meant
them." she was eating; she didn't even look at louvinia. louvinia stood there in the pantry
door, looking at the back of granny's head.

gonter find hit, even if they was to come here again? hit's marse john they done called
the reward on; hit ain't no trunk full of--"


louvinia had set the cornbread on the table and was going out when she stopped

"is we gonter leave tonight?" ringo said. "i thought we wasn't going to start until in

"we're not," granny said. "but it's been three years now since i have started

"whyn't you leave hit here where hit hid good and i can take care of hit? who

"i have my reasons," granny said. "you do what i told you."

"all right. but how come you wanter dig hit up tonight when you ain't leaving until

"why not leave it hid?" i said. "it'll be just that much more load on the wagon. joby

"a thousand fiddlesticks!" granny said. "i don't care if it weighed ten thousand--"

"a nigger?" louvinia said.
"yes."
for a while louvinia didn't say anything. then she said, "did you know him?" "yes,"

"they be ready," she said. "i wish you'd tell me why you got to dig hit up tonight."
granny looked at her. "i had a dream about it last night."
"oh," louvinia said. she and ringo looked exactly alike, except that louvinia's eyes


tomor--"

"you do what i said," granny said.

"yessum," louvinia said. she went out. i looked at granny eating, with her hat sitting
on the exact top of her head, and ringo looking at me across the back of granny's chair
with his eyes rolling a little.

says that trunk will weigh a thousand pounds."

louvinia came in.



were not rolling so much as his.

"i dreamed i was looking out my window, and a man walked into the orchard and
went to where it is and stood there pointing at it," granny said. she looked at louvinia. "a
black man."



granny said. "is you going to tell who hit was?" "no," granny said. louvinia turned to ringo.
"gawn tell your pappy and loosh to get the lantern and the shovels and come on up
here."

joby and loosh were in the kitchen. joby was sitting behind the stove with a plate
on his knees, eating. loosh was sitting on the wood box, still, with the two shovels between
his knees, but i didn't see him at first because of ringo's shadow. the lamp was on the
table, and i could see the shadow of ringo's head bent over and his arm working back
and forth, and louvinia standing between us and the lamp, her hands on her hips and her
elbows spread and her shadow filling the room. "clean that chimney good," she said.

bonnet and loosh's head and the two shovel blades over his shoulder. ringo was
breathing behind me. "which un you reckon she drempt about?" he said.


nothing else bother that trunk, nor marse john neither, if he knowed hit."

length, joby and loosh dug the trunk up from where they had buried it that night last
summer while father was at home, while louvinia stood in the door of the bedroom
without even lighting the lamp while ringo and i went to bed and later i either looked out
or dreamed i looked out the window and saw (or dreamed i saw) the lantern. then, with
granny in front and still carrying the lantern and with ringo and i both helping to carry it,

joby carried the lantern, with granny behind him, and then loosh; i could see her

"why don't you ask her?" i said. we were in the orchard now.
"hoo," ringo said. "me ask her? i bet if she stayed here wouldn't no yankee nor

then they stopped--joby and granny, and while granny held the lantern at arm's

"somebody is," granny said. "are you going to help or are me and bayard going to

"take it into the house," granny said.
"we'll just load hit now and save having to handle hit again in the morning," joby

"take it into the house," granny said. so, after a while, joby moved on toward the

"take it upstairs," granny said. "i want it in my room."
"you mean you gonter tote this thing all the way upstairs and then tote it back

"hah!" he said. "that's done, thank god."
"take it upstairs," granny said.
joby turned and looked at her. he hadn't straightened up yet; he turned, half

we returned toward the house. before we reached the house joby began to bear away
toward where the loaded wagon stood.


said. "come on here, nigger," he said to loosh.

house. we could hear him breathing now, saying "hah!" every few steps. inside the kitchen
he let his end down, hard.



stooping, and looked at her. "which?" he said.


down tomorrow?"

do it alone?"

then louvinia came in. she had already undressed. she looked tall as a ghost, in
one dimension like a bolster case, taller than a bolster case in her nightgown; silent as a
ghost on her bare feet which were the same color as the shadow in which she stood so
that she seemed to have no feet, the twin rows of her toenails lying weightless and faint
and still as two rows of faintly soiled feathers on the floor about a foot below the hem of
her nightgown as if they were not connected with her. she came and shoved joby aside
and stooped to lift the trunk. "git away, nigger," she said. joby groaned, then he shoved
louvinia aside.

loosh, who had never let his end down. "if you gonter ride on hit, pick up your feet," he
said. we carried the trunk up to granny's room, and joby was setting it down again, until
granny made him and loosh pull the bed out from the wall and slide the trunk in behind it;
ringo and i helped again. i don't believe it lacked much of weighing a thousand pounds.

"now i want everybody to go right to bed, so we can get an early start tomorrow,"
granny said.

get started."

"nummine about that," louvinia said. "you do like miss rosa tell you." we went out;
we left granny there beside her bed now well away from the wall and in such an ungainly
position that anyone would have known at once that something was concealed, even if
the trunk which ringo and i as well as joby believed now to weigh at least a thousand
pounds, could have been hidden. as it was, the bed merely underlined it. then granny
shut the door behind us and then ringo and i stopped dead in the hall and looked at one
another. since i could remember, there had never been a key to any door, inside or
outside, about the house. yet we had heard a key turn in the lock.


"git away, woman," he said. he lifted his end of the trunk, then he looked back at

"that's you," joby said. "git everybody up at crack of day and it be noon 'fore we

"i didn't know there was ere a key would fit hit," ringo said, "let alone turn."

"and that's some more of yawls' and joby's business," louvinia said. she had not


stopped; she was already reclining on her cot and as we looked toward her she was
already in the act of drawing the quilt up over her face and head. "yawl get on to bed."

we went on to our room and began to undress. the lamp was lighted and there
was already laid out across two chairs our sunday clothes which we too would put on
tomorrow to go to memphis in. "which un you reckin she dremp about?" ringo said. but i
didn't answer that; i knew that ringo knew i didn't need to.


2

we put on our sunday clothes by lamplight, we ate breakfast by it and listened to louvinia
above stairs as she removed from granny's and my beds the linen we had slept under last
night and rolled up ringo's pallet and carried them downstairs; in the first beginning of day
we went out to where loosh and joby had already put the mules into the wagon and
where joby stood in what he called his sunday clothes too--the old frock coat, the napless
beaver hat of father's. when granny came out (still in the black silk and the bonnet as if
she had slept in them, passed the night standing rigidly erect with her hand on the key
which she had produced from we knew not where and locked her door for the first time
ringo and i knew of) with her shawl over her shoulders and carrying her parasol and the
musket from the pegs over the mantel. she held out the musket to joby. "here," she said.
joby looked at it.



even have time to hear we on the road. i speck marse john got the yankees pretty well
cleant out between here and memphis anyway."

musket until after a while joby took it and put it into the wagon. "now go get the trunk,"
granny said. joby was still putting the musket into the wagon; he stopped, his head turned
a little.

steps and looking at him; he was not looking at any of us, not speaking to any of us in
particular. "ain't i tole you?" he said.

minutes, i don't remember it," granny said. "but just what do you refer to now?"

passed granny and went on. she didn't look at them; it was as if they had walked not only
out of her sight but out of her mind. evidently joby thought they had. he and granny were
like that; they were like a man and a mare, a blooded mare, which takes just exactly so
much from the man and the man knows the mare will take just so much and the man
knows that when that point is reached, just what is going to happen. then it does happen:
the mare kicks him, not viciously but just enough, and the man knows it was going to
happen and so he is glad then, it is over then, or he thinks it is over, so he lies or sits on the

"we won't need hit," he said.
"put it in the wagon," granny said.
"nome. we won't need nothing like that. we be in memphis so quick won't nobody

"which?" he said. he turned a little more, still not looking at granny standing on the

this time granny didn't say anything at all. she just stood there holding out the

"if anything ever came into your mind that you didn't tell to somebody inside of ten

"nummine that," joby said. "come on here, loosh. bring that boy with you." they

ground and cusses the mare a little because he thinks it is over, finished, and then the
mare turns her head and nips him. that's how joby and granny were and granny always
beat him, not bad: just exactly enough, like now; he and loosh were just about to go in
the door and granny still not even looking after them, when joby said, "i done tole um.
and i reckin even you can't dispute hit." then granny, without moving anything but her lips,
still looking out beyond the waiting wagon as if we were not going anywhere and joby
didn't even exist, said, "and put the bed back against the wall." this time joby didn't
answer. he just stopped perfectly still, not even looking back at granny, until loosh said
quietly, "gawn, pappy. get on." they went on; granny and i stood at the end of the
gallery and heard them drag the trunk out, then shove the bed back where it had been
yesterday; we heard them on the stairs with the trunk--the slow, clumsy, coffinsounding
thumps. then they came out onto the gallery.

"go and help them," granny said without looking back. "remember, joby is getting
old." we put the trunk into the wagon, along with the musket and the basket of food and
the bedclothing, and got in ourselves--granny on the seat beside joby, the bonnet on the
exact top of her head and the parasol raised even before the dew had begun to fall--and
we drove away. loosh had already disappeared, but louvinia still stood at the end of the
gallery with father's old hat on top of her head rag. then i stopped looking back, though i
could feel ringo beside me on the trunk turning every few yards, even after we were
outside the gate and in the road to town. then we came to the curve where we had seen
the yankee sergeant on the bright horse last summer.

"hit gone now," ringo said. "goodbye, sartoris; memphis, how-dy-do!"

the sun was just rising when we came in sight of jefferson; we passed a company
of troops bivouacked in a pasture beside the road, eating breakfast. their uniforms were
not gray anymore now; they were almost the color of dead leaves and some of them
didn't even have uniforms and one man waved a skillet at us and he had on a pair of blue
yankee pants with a yellow cavalry stripe like father wore home last summer. "hey,
missippi!" he shouted. "hooraw for arkansaw!"

drive out home now and then and look after the flowers. then ringo and i drove the
wagon on to the store and we were just coming out with the sack of salt when uncle buck
mccaslin came hobbling across the square, waving his stick and hollering, and behind him
the captain of the company we had passed eating breakfast in the pasture. there were
two of them; i mean, there were two mccaslins, amodeus and theophilus, twins, only
everybody called them buck and buddy except themselves. they were bachelors, they
had a big bottom-land plantation about fifteen miles from town. it had a big colonial
house on it which their father had built and which people said was still one of the finest
houses in the country when they inherited it. but it wasn't now, because uncle buck and
buddy didn't live in it. they never had lived in it since their father died. they lived in a two-
room log house with about a dozen dogs, and they kept their niggers in the manor house.
it didn't have any windows now and a child with a hairpin could unlock any lock in it, but
every night when the niggers came up from the fields uncle buck or uncle buddy would
drive them into the house and lock the door with a key almost as big as a horse pistol;
probably they would still be locking the front door long after the last nigger had escaped
out the back. and folks said that uncle buck and uncle buddy knew this and that the
niggers knew they knew it, only it was like a game with rules--neither one of uncle buck or
uncle buddy to peep around the corner of the house while the other was locking the door,
none of the niggers to escape in such a way as to be seen even by unavoidable

we left granny at mrs. compson's, to tell mrs. compson goodbye and to ask her to

there was more to uncle buck and buddy than just that. father said they were

accident, nor to escape at any other time; they even said that the ones who couldn't get
out while the door was being locked voluntarily considered themselves interdict until the
next evening. then they would hang the key on a nail beside the door and go back to
their own little house full of dogs and eat supper and play head-and-head poker; and
they said how no man in the state or on the river either would have dared to play with
them even if they did not cheat, but that in the game as they played it between
themselves, betting niggers and wagon-loads of cotton with one another on the turn of a
single card, the lord himself might have held his own with one of them at a time, but that
with both of them even he would have lost his shirt.

ahead of their time; he said they not only possessed, but put into practice, ideas about
social relationship that maybe fifty years after they were both dead people would have a
name for. these ideas were about land. they believed that land did not belong to people
but that people belonged to land and that the earth would permit them to live on and
out of it and use it only so long as they behaved and that if they did not behave right, it
would shake them off just like a dog getting rid of fleas. they had some kind of a system of
bookkeeping which must have been even more involved than their betting score against
one another, by which all their niggers were to be freed, not given freedom, but earning it,
buying it not in money from uncle buck and buddy, but in work from the plantation. only
there were others besides niggers, and this was the reason why uncle buck came hobbling
across the square, shaking his stick at me and hollering, or at least why it was uncle buck
who was hobbling and hollering and shaking the stick. one day father said how they
suddenly realized that if the county ever split up into private feuds either with votes or
weapons, no family could contend with the mccaslins because all the other families
would have only their cousins and kin to recruit from, while uncle buck and buddy would
already have an army. these were the dirt farmers, the people whom the niggers called
'white trash'--men who had owned no slaves and some of whom even lived worse than
the slaves on big plantations. it was another side of uncle buck's and buddy's ideas about
men and land, which father said people didn't have a name for yet, by which uncle buck
and buddy had persuaded the white men to pool their little patches of poor hill land along
with the niggers and the mccaslin plantation, promising them in return nobody knew
exactly what, except that their women and children did have shoes, which not all of them
had had before, and a lot of them even went to school. anyway, they (the white men, the
trash) looked on uncle buck and buddy like deity himself, so that when father began to
raise his first regiment to take to virginia and uncle buck and buddy came to town to enlist
and the others decided they were too old (they were past seventy), it looked for a while as
if father's regiment would have to fight its first engagement right there in our pasture. at
first uncle buck and buddy said they would form a company of their own men in
opposition to father's. then they realized that this wouldn't stop father, so then uncle buck
and buddy put the thumbscrews on father sure enough. they told father that if he did not
let them go, the solid bloc of private soldier white trash votes which they controlled would
not only force father to call a special election of officers before the regiment left the
pasture, it would also demote father from colonel to major or maybe only a company
commander. father didn't mind what they called him; colonel or corporal, it would have
been all the same to him, as long as they let him tell them what to do, and he probably
wouldn't have minded being demoted even to private by god himself; it was the idea
that there could be latent within the men he led the power, let alone the desire, to so
affront him. so they compromised; they agreed at last that one of the mccaslins should be
allowed to go. father and uncle buck and buddy shook hands on it and they stuck to it;

father said it was fine, that there were people there who had never seen anything

the following summer after second manassas when the men did demote father, it was the
mccaslin votes who stuck with and resigned from the regiment along with father and
returned to mississippi with him and formed his irregular cavalry. so one of them was to go,
and they decided themselves which one it would be; they decided in the one possible
manner in which the victor could know that he had earned his right, the loser that he had
been conquered by a better man; uncle buddy looked at uncle buck and said, "all right,
'philus, you old butter-fingered son of a bitch. get out the cards."

like it for cold and ruthless artistry. they played three hands of draw poker, the first two
hands dealt in turn, the winner of the second hand to deal the third; they sat there
(somebody had spread a blanket and the whole regiment watched) facing each other
with the two old faces that did not look exactly alike so much as they looked exactly like
something which after a while you remembered--the portrait of someone who had been
dead a long time and that you knew just by looking at him he had been a preacher in
some place like massachusetts a hundred years ago; they sat there and called those
face-down cards correctly without even looking at the backs of them apparently, so that
it took sometimes eight and ten deals before the referees could be certain that neither of
them knew exactly what was in the other's hand. and uncle buck lost: so that now uncle
buddy was a sergeant in tennant's brigade in virginia and uncle buck was hobbling across
the square, shaking his stick at me and hollering:
"by godfrey, there he is! there's john sartoris' boy!"

the captain came up and looked at me. "i've heard of your father," he said.


"heard of him?" uncle buck shouted. by now people had begun to stop along the
walk and listen to him, like they always did, not smiling so he could see it. "who ain't heard
about him in this country? get the yankees to tell you about him sometime. by godfrey, he
raised the first damn regiment in mississippi out of his own pocket, and took 'em to ferginny
and whipped yankees right and left with 'em before he found out that what he had
bought and paid for wasn't a regiment of soldiers but a congress of politicians and fools.
fools i say!" he shouted, shaking the stick at me and glaring with his watery fierce eyes like
the eyes of an old hawk, with the people along the street listening to him and smiling
where he couldn't see it and the strange captain looking at him a little funny because he
hadn't heard uncle buck before; and i kept on thinking about louvinia standing there on
the porch with father's old hat on, and wishing that uncle buck would get through or hush
so we could go on.

"fools, i say!" he shouted. "i don't care if some of you folks here do still claim kin with
men that elected him colonel and followed him and stonewall jackson right up to spitting
distance of washington without hardly losing a man, and then next year turned around
and voted him down to major and elected in his stead a damn feller that never even
knowed which end of a gun done the shooting until john sartoris showed him." he quit
shouting just as easy as he started but the shouting was right there, waiting to start again
as soon as he found something else to shout about. "i won't say god take care of you and
your grandma on the road, boy, because by godfrey you don't need god's nor nobody
else's help; all you got to say is 'i'm john sartoris' boy; rabbits, hunt the canebrake' and
then watch the blue-bellied sons of bitches fly."
"are they leaving, going away?" the captain said.


then uncle buck begun to shout again, going into the shouting easy, without even
having to draw a breath: "leaving? hell's skillet, who's going to take care of them around

"how many men has your father got in his regiment?" he said.
"it's not a regiment, sir," i said. "he's got about fifty, i reckon."
"fifty?" the captain said. "fifty? we had a prisoner last week who said he had more

here? john sartoris is a damn fool; they voted him out of his own private regiment in
kindness, so he could come home and take care of his family, knowing that if he didn't
wouldn't nobody around here be likely to. but that don't suit john sartoris because john
sartoris is a damned confounded selfish coward, askeered to stay at home where the
yankees might get him. yes, sir. so skeered that he has to raise him up another batch of
men to protect him every time he gets within a hundred foot of a yankee brigade.
scouring all up and down the country, finding yankees to dodge; only if it had been me i
would have took back to ferginny and i'd have showed that new colonel what fighting
looked like. but not john sartoris. he's a coward and a fool. the best he can do is dodge
and run away from yankees until they have to put a price on his head, and now he's got
to send his family out of the country; to memphis where maybe the union army will take
care of them, since it don't look like his own government and fellow citizens are going to."
he ran out of breath then, or out of words anyway, standing there with his tobacco-
stained beard trembling and more tobacco running onto it out of his mouth, and shaking
his stick at me. so i lifted the reins; only the captain spoke; he was still watching me.



than a thousand. he said that colonel sartoris didn't fight; he just stole horses."

his leg and holding to the wagon wheel like he was about to fall. "that's it! that's john
sartoris! he gets the horses; any fool can step out and get a yankee. these two damn boys
here did that last summer--stepped down to the gate and brought back a whole
regiment, and them just--how old are you, boy?" "fourteen," i said.

nothing happens. . . . i reckon granny waiting on us, bayard."

i turned the wagon. "you take care of your grandma, boy, or john sartoris will skin you
alive. and if he don't, i will!" when the wagon straightened out, he began to hobble along
beside it. "and when you see him, tell him i said to leave the horses go for a while and kill
the blue-bellied sons of bitches. kill them!"


waiting for us at the compsons' gate. joby had another basket with a napkin over it and a
bottle neck sticking out and some rose cuttings. then ringo and i sat behind again, and
ringo turning to look back every few feet and saying, "goodbye, jefferson. memphis,
how-de-do!" and then we came to the top of the first hill and he looked back, quiet this
time, and said, "suppose they don't never get done fighting."

and granny opened the basket, and she took out the rose cuttings and handed them to
ringo.

roots, in a cloth; when ringo stooped down to the water, i watched him pinch off a little of
the dirt and start to put it into his pocket. then he looked up and saw me watching him,
and he made like he was going to throw it away. but he didn't.

"yes, sir," i said. we went on.
"good thing for his mouth granny ain't here," ringo said. she and joby were

"we ain't fourteen yit," ringo said. "but we will be in september, if we live and

uncle buck quit laughing. he stepped back. "git on," he said. "you got a long road."

uncle buck had enough wind to laugh though. he sounded just like a hen, slapping

"all right," i said. "suppose it." i didn't look back. at noon we stopped by a spring

"dip the roots into the spring after you drink," she said. they had earth still on the

"i reckon i can save dirt if i want to," he said. "it's not sartoris dirt though," i said. "i

"what'll you bet?" i said. he looked at me. "what'll you swap?" i said. he looked at

"yes," i said. "i brought enough to last." we soaked the cuttings every time we

"memphis?" the officer said "you can't get to memphis. there was a fight at


know hit," he said. "hit's closer than memphis dirt though. closer than what you got."

me. "what you swap?" he said.

"you know," i said. he reached into his pocket and brought out the buckle we had
shot off the yankee saddle when we shot the horse last summer. "gimmit here," he said. so
i took the snuff box from my pocket and emptied half the soil (it was more than sartoris
earth; it was vicksburg too: the yelling was in it, the embattled, the iron-worn, the
supremely invincible) into his hand. "i know hit," he said. "hit come from 'hind the
smokehouse. you brung a lot of hit."

stopped and opened the basket, and there was some of the food left on the fourth day
because at least once a day we stopped at houses on the road and ate with them, and
on the second night we had supper and breakfast at the same house. but even then
granny would not come inside to sleep. she made her bed down in the wagon by the
chest and joby slept under the wagon with the gun beside him like when we camped on
the road. only it would not be exactly on the road but back in the woods a way; on the
third night granny was in the wagon and joby and ringo and i were under the wagon
and some cavalry rode up and granny said, "joby! the gun!" and somebody got down
and took the gun away from joby and they lit a pine knot and we saw the gray.

cockrum yesterday and the roads are full of yankee patrols. how in hell--excuse me,
ma'am (behind me ringo said, "git the soap")--you ever got this far i don't see. if i were
you, i wouldn't even try to go back, i'd stop at the first house i came to and stay there."

"i reckon we'll go on," granny said, "like john--colonel sartoris told us to. my sister
lives in memphis; we are going there."
"colonel sartoris?" the officer said. "colonel sartoris told you?"

"i'm his mother-in-law," granny said. "this is his son."


"good lord, ma'am. you can't go a step farther. don't you know that if they
captured you and this boy, they could almost force him to come in and surrender?"

granny looked at him; she was sitting up in the wagon and her hat was on. "my
experience with yankees has evidently been different from yours. i have no reason to
believe that their officers--i suppose they still have officers among them--will bother a
woman and two children. i thank you, but my son has directed us to go to memphis. if
there is any information about the roads which my driver should know, i will be obliged if
you will instruct him."

return there and wait. colonel sartoris was at cockrum yesterday; by tomorrow night i
believe i can find him and bring him to you."

own affairs. i think we will continue to memphis as he instructed us."

between us; only, every time i turned over i rolled on it, so i made him move it and he tried
to put it in the wagon with granny, and she wouldn't let him, so he leaned it against a tree

"thank you," granny said. "wherever colonel sartoris is, he is doubtless busy with his

"then let me give you an escort. or better still, there is a house about a mile back;

so they rode away and joby came back under the wagon and put the musket

joby said, "them folks look like they trying to make the yankees take they stock,

it was fast--like that--all sweating horses with wild eyes, and men with wild faces full

they rode right out of the dust cloud without seeing us at all, crossing the road, and

and we slept and ate breakfast and went on, with ringo and joby looking behind every
tree we passed. "you ain't going to find them behind a tree we have already passed," i
said. we didn't. we had passed where a house had burned, and then we were passing
another house with an old white horse looking at us out of the stable door behind it, and
then i saw six men running in the next field, and then we saw a dust cloud coming fast out
of a lane that crossed the road.

running hit up and down the big road in broad daylight like that."

the first ten or twelve had already jumped the ditch with pistols in their hands, like when
you run with a stick of wood balanced on your palm; and the last ones came out of the
dust with five men running and holding to stirrups, and us sitting there in the wagon with
joby holding the mules like they were sitting down on the whiffletrees and his mouth
hanging open and his eyes like two eggs, and i had forgotten what the blue coats looked
like.

of yelling, and then granny standing up in the wagon and beating the five men about
their heads and shoulders with the umbrella while they unfastened the traces and cut the
harness off the mules with pocket knives. they didn't say a word; they didn't even look at
granny while she was hitting them; they just took the mules out of the wagon, and then
the two mules and the five men disappeared together in another cloud of dust, and the
mules came out of the dust, soaring like hawks, with two men on them and two more just
falling backward over the mules' tails and the fifth man already running, too, and the two
that were on their backs in the road getting up with little scraps of cut leather sticking to
them like a kind of black shavings in a sawmill. the three of them went off across the field
after the mules, and then we heard the pistols away off like striking a handful of matches
at one time, and joby still sitting on the seat with his mouth still open and the ends of the
cut reins in his hands, and granny still standing in the wagon with the bent umbrella lifted
and hollering at ringo and me while we jumped out of the wagon and ran across the
road.

"the stable," i said. "the stable!" while we were running up the hill toward the house,
we could see our mules still galloping in the field, and we could see the three men running
too. when we ran around the house, we could see the wagon, too, in the road, with joby
on the seat above the wagon tongue sticking straight out ahead, and granny standing up
and shaking the umbrella toward us, and even though i couldn't hear her i knew she was
still shouting. our mules had run into the woods, but the three men were still in the field and
the old white horse was watching them, too, in the barn door; he never saw us until he
snorted and jerked back and kicked over something behind him. it was a homemade
shoeing box, and he was tied by a rope halter to the ladder to the loft, and there was
even a pipe still burning on the ground.
we climbed onto the ladder and got on him, and when we came out of the barn

we could still see the three men; but we had to stop while ringo got down and opened
the lot gate and got back on again, and so they were gone, too, by then. when we
reached the woods, there was no sign of them and we couldn't hear anything, either, but
the old horse's insides. we went on slower then, because the old horse wouldn't go fast
again, anyway, and so we tried to listen, and so it was almost sunset when we came out
into a road.

"are you sure?" i said.
"is i sure? you reckon i ain't followed them mules all my life and i can't tell they

we went on, but the old horse could not go very fast. after a while the moon came

"lord, marse john," ringo said. "you know hit ain't no yankee gonter bother her if he

"here where they went," ringo said. they were mule tracks. "tinney and old

hundred's tracks bofe," ringo said. "i know um anywhere. they done throwed them
yankees and heading back home."


tracks when i see um? .. . git up there, horse!"

up, but ringo still said he could see the tracks of our mules. so we went on, only now the
old horse went even slower than ever because presently i caught ringo and held him as
he slipped off and then a little later ringo caught and held me from slipping before i even
knew that i had been asleep. we didn't know what time it was, we didn't care; we only
heard after a time the slow hollow repercussion of wood beneath the horse's feet and we
turned from the road and hitched the bridle to a sapling; we probably both crawled
beneath the bridge already asleep; still sleeping, we doubtless continued to crawl.
because if we had not moved, they would not have found us. i waked, still believing i
dreamed of thunder. it was light; even beneath the close weed-choked bridge ringo and
i could sense the sun though not at once; for the time we just sat there beneath the loud
drumming, while the loose planks of the bridge floor clattered and danced to the hooves;
we sat there for a moment staring at one another in the pale jonquil-colored light almost
before we were awake. perhaps that was it, perhaps we were still asleep, were taken so
suddenly in slumber that we had not time to think of yankees or anything else; we were
out from beneath the bridge and already running before we remembered having begun
to move; i looked back one time and (the road, the bridge, was five or six feet higher than
the earth beside it) it looked as if the whole rim of the world was full of horses running along
the sky. then everything ran together again as it had yesterday; even while our legs still
continued to run ringo and i had dived like two rabbits into a brier patch, feeling no thorn,
and lay on our faces in it while men shouted and horses crashed around us, then hard
hands dragged us, clawing and kicking and quite blind, out of the thicket and onto our
feet. then sight returned--a vacuum, an interval, of amazing and dewy-breathed peace
and quiet while ringo and i stood in a circle of mounted and dismounted men and horses.
then i recognized jupiter standing big and motionless and pale in the dawn as a
mesmerised flame, then father was shaking me and shouting, "where's your grandmother?
where's miss rosa?" and then ringo, in a tone of complete amazement: "we done fergot
granny!" "forgot her?" father shouted. "you mean you ran away and left her sitting there in
that wagon in the middle of the road?"

know hit." father swore. "how far back did you leave her?"
"it was about three o'clock yesterday," i said. "we rode some last night."


father turned to the others. "two of you boys take them up behind you; we'll lead
that horse." then he stopped and turned back to us. "have you-all had anything to eat?"


"where did you get that horse?" he said.



"eat?" ringo said. "my stomach think my throat been cut."
father took a pone of bread from his saddle bag and broke it and gave it to us.

after a while i said, "we borrowed it."
"who from?" father said.

after a while ringo said, "we ain't know. the man wasn't there." one of the men

"i tole you they wasn't no yankees gonter stop granny," ringo said. "i bet she in

"you mean hit belong to me?" ringo said. "no," father said. "you borrowed it." then

"don't you say a word, colonel," one of them said. "hooraw for sartoris!"
we galloped back; it was not far; we came to the field where the men had run,


laughed. father looked at him quick, and he hushed. but just for a minute, because all of a
sudden they all began to whoop and holler, and father looking around at them and his
face getting redder and redder.


and the house with the barn, and in the road we could still see the scraps of harness where
they had cut it. but the wagon was gone. father led the old horse up to the house himself
and knocked on the porch floor with his pistol, and the door of the house was still open,
but nobody came. we put the old horse back into the barn; the pipe was still on the
ground by the overturned shoeing box. we came back to the road and father sat jupiter
in the middle of the litter of harness scraps.
"you damn boys," he said. "you damn boys."


when we went on now, we went slower; there were three men riding on ahead out
of sight. in the afternoon, one of them came galloping back, and father left ringo and me
three others, and he and the rest rode on; it was almost sunset when they came back with
their horses sweated a little and leading two new horses with blue blankets under the
saddles and u. s. burned on the horses' hips.

memphis right now." "i hope for your sake she is," father said. he jerked his hand at the new
horses. "you and bayard get on them." ringo went to one of the new horses. "wait," father
said; "the other one is yours."

we all stopped and watched ringo trying to get on his horse. the horse would stand
perfectly still until he would feel ringo's weight on the stirrup; then he would whirl
completely around until his off side faced ringo; the first time ringo wound up lying on his
back in the road.

"get on him from that side," father said laughing. ringo looked at the horse and
then at father. "git up from the wrong side?" ringo said. "i knowed yankees wasn't folks,
but i never knowed before they horses ain't horses."

"get on up," father said. "he's blind in his near eye." it got dark while we were still
riding, and after a while i waked up with somebody holding me in the saddle, and we
were stopped in some trees and there was a fire, but ringo and i didn't even stay awake
to eat, and then it was morning again and all of them were gone but father and eleven
more, but we didn't start off even then; we stayed there in the trees all day. "what are we
going to do now?" i said.

find your grandmother," father said.
just before dark we started; we watched ringo trying to get on his horse from the

nigh side for a while and then we went on. we rode until dawn and stopped again. this
time we didn't build a fire; we didn't even unsaddle right away; we lay hidden in the
woods, and then father was waking me with his hand. it was after sunup and we lay there
and listened to a column of yankee infantry pass in the road, and then i slept again. it was
noon when i waked. there was a fire now and a shote cooking over it, and we ate. "we'll
be home by midnight," father said.

"i'm going to take you damn boys home, and then i've got to go to memphis and

jupiter was rested. he didn't want the bridle for a while and then he didn't want

"he going all right," ringo said. "he like hit this way. maybe because he can smell

"all right," father said. "watch him though." we went on. mine and ringo's horses

jupiter was fine to watch, with his head up and watching my horse and ringo's,

"i wish i knew your grandmother was all right," father said.
"lord, marse john," ringo said, "is you still worrying about granny? i been knowed


father to get on him, and even after we were started he still wanted to go; father had to
hold him back between ringo and me. ringo was on his right. "you and bayard better
swap sides," father told ringo, "so your horse can see what's beside him."

jupiter another horse, and know jupiter ain't fixing to get on him and ride."

could go pretty well, too; when i looked back, the others were a good piece behind, out
of our dust. it wasn't far to sundown.


her all my life; i ain't worried about her."

and boring a little and just beginning to drive a little. "i'm going to let him go a little," father
said. "you and ringo watch yourselves." i thought jupiter was gone then. he went out like
a rocket, flattening a little. but i should have known that father still held him, because i
should have seen that he was still boring, but there was a snake fence along the road, and
all of a sudden it began to blur, and then i realised that father and jupiter had not moved
up at all, that it was all three of us flattening out up toward the crest of the hill where the
road dipped like three swallows, and i was thinking, 'we're holding jupiter. we're holding
jupiter,' when father looked back, and i saw his eyes and his teeth in his beard, and i
knew he still had jupiter on the bit.

exactly like i have seen a hawk come out of a sage field and rise over a fence.

when they reached the crest of the hill, i could see sky under them and the tops of
the trees beyond the hill like they were flying, sailing out into the air to drop down beyond
the hill like the hawk; only they didn't. it was like father stopped jupiter in mid-air on top of
the hill; i could see him standing in the stirrups and his arm up with his hat in it, and then
ringo and i were on them before we could even begin to think to pull, and jupiter reined
back onto his haunches, and when father hit ringo's horse across the blind eye with the
hat i saw ringo's horse swerve and jump clean over the snake fence, and i heard ringo
hollering as i went on over the crest of the hill, with father just behind me shooting his pistol
and shouting, "surround them, boys! don't let a man escape!"

there is a limit to what a child can accept, assimilate; not to what it can believe
because a child can believe anything, given time, but to what it can accept, a limit in
time, in the very time which nourishes the believing of the incredible. and i was still a child
at that moment when father's and my horses came over the hill and seemed to cease
galloping and to float, hang suspended rather in a dimension without time in it while
father held my horse reined back with one hand and i heard ringo's half-blind beast
crashing and blundering among the trees to our right and ringo yelling, and looked quietly
down at the scene beneath rather than before us--the dusk, the fire, the creek running
quiet and peaceful beneath a bridge, the muskets all stacked carefully and neatly and
nobody within fifty feet of them; and the men, the faces, the blue yankee coats and pants
and boots, squatting about the fire with cups in their hands and looking toward the crest
of the hill with the same peaceful expression on all their faces like so many dolls. father's

he said, "watch out, now," and then jupiter shot out from between us; he went out

ringo was the only difficult one to capture. the rest of father's men came piling

"certainly, captain," father said. "and with your permission, i shall now retire and

we went back into the darkness. we could see them about the fire, spreading their

hat was flung onto his head now, his teeth were showing and his eyes were bright as a
cat's.

"lieutenant," he said, loud, jerking my horse around, "ride back up the hill and close
in with your troop on their right. git!" he whispered, slapping my horse across the rump with
his hand. "make a fuss! holler! see if you can keep up with ringo.--boys," he said, while they
still looked up at him; they hadn't even put the cups down: "boys, i'm john sartoris, and i
reckon i've got you."

over the hill, reining back, and i reckon that for a minute their faces looked about like the
yankees' faces did, and now and then i would quit thrashing the bushes and i could hear
ringo on his side hollering and moaning and hollering again, "marse john! you, marse
john! you come here quick!" and hollering for me, calling bayard and colonel and marse
john and granny until it did sound like a company at least, and then hollering at his horse
again, and it running back and forth. i reckon he had forgotten again and was trying to
get up on the nigh side again, until at last father said, "all right, boys. you can come on in."

it was almost dark then. they had built up a fire, and the yankees still sitting around
it and father and the others standing over them with their pistols while two of them were
taking the yankees' pants and boots off. ringo was still hollering off in the trees. "i reckon
you better go and extricate lieutenant marengo," father said. only about that time
ringo's horse came bursting out with his blind eye looking big as a plate and still trotting in
a circle with his knees up to his chin, and then ringo came out. he looked wilder than the
horse; he was already talking, he was saying, "i'm gonter tell granny on you, making my
horse run--" when he saw the yankees. his mouth was already open, and he kind of
squatted for a second, looking at them. then he hollered, "look out! ketch um! ketch um,
marse john! they stole old hundred and tinney!"


believe there's another man of you but what i see."


memphis shooting at us for ghosts? . . . i suppose we can have our blankets to sleep in,
can't we?"

leave you to set about that business."

blankets on the ground.

said.

do you want to do with them?"

"shoot 'em," ringo said. "this ain't the first time me and bayard ever shot yankees."

"no," father said. "i have a better plan than that. one that joe johnston will thank
us for." he turned to the others behind him. "have you got the muskets and ammunition?"

we all ate supper together--father and us and the yankees in their underclothes.
the officer talked to father. he said, "colonel, i believe you have fooled us. i don't

"you might try to depart, and prove your point," father said.
"depart? like this? and have every darky and old woman between here and

"what in the tarnation do you want with sixty prisoners, john?" one of father's men

"i don't," father said. he looked at me and ringo. "you boys captured them. what

"yes, colonel," somebody said.
"grub, boots, clothes?"
"everything but the blankets, colonel."
"we'll pick them up in the morning," father said. "now wait."
we sat there in the dark. the yankees were going to bed. one of them went to the






fire and picked up a stick. then he stopped. he didn't turn his head and we didn't hear
anything or see anybody move. then he put the stick down again and came back to his
blanket. "wait," father whispered. after a while the fire had died down. "now listen," father
whispered. so we sat there in the dark and listened to the yankees sneaking off into the
bushes in their underclothes. once we heard a splash and somebody cursing, and then a
sound like somebody had shut his hand over his mouth. father didn't laugh out loud; he
just sat there shaking.


father said, "everybody get a blanket and let's go to bed."

while, we came to the creek; we passed the hole where ringo and i learned to swim and
we began to pass the fields, too, and we came to where ringo and i hid last summer and
saw the first yankee we ever saw, and then we could see the house, too, and ringo said,
"sartoris, here we is; let them that want memphis take hit and keep hit bofe." because we
were looking at the house, it was like that day when we ran across the pasture and the
house would not seem to get any nearer at all. we never saw the wagon at all; it was
father that saw it; it was coming up the road from jefferson, with granny sitting thin and
straight on the seat with mrs. compson's rose cuttings wrapped in a new piece of paper in
her hand, and joby yelling and lashing the strange horses, and father stopping us at the
gate with his hat raised while the wagon went in first. granny didn't say a word. she just
looked at ringo and me, and went on, with us coming behind, and she didn't stop at the
house. the wagon went on into the orchard and stopped by the hole where we had dug
the trunk up, and still granny didn't say a word; it was father that got down and got into
the wagon and took up one end of the trunk and said over his shoulder, "jump up here,
boys."

went into the back parlor, and father put the musket back onto the pegs over the mantel,
and granny put down mrs. compson's rose cuttings and took off her hat and looked at
ringo and me. "get the soap," she said. "we haven't cussed any," i said. "ask father." "they
behaved all right, miss rosa," father said. granny looked at us. then she came and put her
hand on me and then on ringo. "go upstairs--" she said.




nobody there.--take off your sunday clothes," she said.

it was hot the next day, so we only worked on the new pen until dinner and quit. it
was even too hot for ringo and me to ride our horses. even at six o'clock it was still hot; the

"how did you and joby manage to get those horses?" father said.
granny was looking at us. "i borrowed them," she said.--"upstairs and take off your--"
"who from?" father said.
granny looked at father for a second, then back at us. "i don't know. there was

"look out for moccasins," one of the others whispered behind us.
it must have taken them two hours to get done sneaking off into the bushes. then

the sun was high when he waked us. "home for dinner," he said. and so, after a

we buried the trunk again, and we walked behind the wagon to the house. we

"get away," father said. he went up onto jupiter's bare back like a bird, holding

jupiter's head was pointing down the hallway toward the lattice half doors at the

louvinia was shelling peas in the kitchen. when she stood up, the bowl broke on

i ran then. ringo was just coming around the corner of the house; we both ran.

rosin was still cooking out of the front steps at six o'clock. father was sitting in his shirt
sleeves and his stockings, with his feet on the porch railing, and ringo and i were sitting on
the steps waiting for it to get cool enough to ride, when we saw them coming into the
gate--about fifty of them, coming "fast, and i remember how hot the blue coats looked.
"father," i said. "father!"

"don't run," father said. "ringo, you go around the house and catch jupiter. bayard,
you go through the house and tell louvinia to have my boots and pistols at the back door;
then you go and help ringo. don't run, now; walk."

the floor. "oh lord," she said. "oh lord. again?"

jupiter was in his stall, eating; he slashed out at us, his feet banged against the wall right
by my head twice, like pistols, before ringo jumped down from the hayrack onto his head.
we got the bridle on him, but he wouldn't take the saddle. "get your horse and shove his
blind side up!" i was hollering at ringo when father came in, running, with his boots in his
hand, and we looked up the hill toward the house and saw one of them riding around the
corner with a short carbine, carrying it in one hand like a lamp.

him for a moment and looking down at us. he didn't speak loud at all; he didn't even
sound in a hurry. "take care of granny," he said. "all right, jupe. let's go."

back; he went out again, out from between me and ringo like he did yesterday, with
father already lifting him and i thinking, "he can't jump through that little hole." jupiter took
the doors on his chest, only they seemed to burst before he even touched them, and i saw
him and father again like they were flying in the air, with broken planks whirling and
spinning around them when they went out of sight. and then the yankee rode into the
barn and saw us, and threw down with the carbine and shot at us point-blank with one
hand, like it was a pistol, and said, "where'd he go, the rebel son of a bitch?"

the smoke beginning to come out of the downstairs windows: "marse john setting on the
porch and them yankees riding through the flower beds and say, 'brother, we wanter
know where the rebel john sartoris live,' and marse john say, 'hey?' with his hand to his ear
and his face look like he born loony like unc few mitchell, and yankee say, 'sartoris, john
sartoris,' and marse john say, 'which? say which?' until he know yankee stood about all he
going to, and marse john say, 'oh, john sartoris. whyn't you say so in the first place?' and
yankee cussing him for idiot fool, and marse john say, 'hey? how's that?' and yankee say,
'nothing! nothing! show me where john sartoris is 'fore i put rope around your neck too!'
and marse john say, 'lemme git my shoes and i show you,' and come into house limping,
and then run down the hall at me and say, 'boots and pistols, louvinia. take care of miss
rosa and the chillen,' and i go to the door, but i just a nigger. yankee say, "that woman's
lying. i believe that man was sartoris himself. go look in the barn quick and see if that
claybank stallion there'"--until granny stopped and began to shake her.

the silver is buried? call joby. hurry!" she turned louvinia toward the cabins and hit her
exactly like father turned my horse and hit him when we rode down the hill and into the
yankees, and then granny turned to run back toward the house; only now it was louvinia
holding her and granny trying to get away.

louvinia kept on trying to tell us about it while we were running and looking back at

"hush!" granny said. "hush! can't you understand that loosh has shown them where

"don't you go back there, miss rosa!" louvinia said. "bayard, hold her; help me,

"let me go!" granny said. "call joby! loosh has shown them where the silver is

"but the silver belongs to john sartoris," granny said. "who are you to give it away?"
"you ax me that?" loosh said. "where john sartoris? whyn't he come and ax me


bayard! they'll kill her!"

buried!" but we held her; she was strong and thin and light as a cat, but we held her. the
smoke was boiling up now, and we could hear it or them--something--maybe all of them
making one sound--the yankees and the fire. and then i saw loosh. he was coming up
from his cabin with a bundle on his shoulder tied up in a bandanna and philadelphy
behind him, and his face looked like it had that night last summer when ringo and i looked
into the window and saw him after he came back from seeing the yankees. granny
stopped fighting. she said, "loosh."

he stopped and looked at her; he looked like he was asleep, like he didn't even
see us or was seeing something we couldn't. but philadelphy saw us; she cringed back
behind him, looking at granny. "i tried to stop him, miss rosa," she said. " 'fore god i tried."
"loosh," granny said, "are you going too?" "yes," loosh said, "i going. i done been freed;
god's own angel proclamated me free and gonter general me to jordan. i don't belong
to john sartoris now;  i belongs to me and god."


that? let god ax john sartoris who the man name that give me to him. let the man that
buried me in the black dark ax that of the man what dug me free." he wasn't looking at us;
i don't think he could even see us. he went on.


and starvation?"

he my husband. i reckon i got to go with him."

boiled up, yellow and slow, and turning copper-colored in the sunset like dust; it was like
dust from a road above the feet that made it, and then went on, boiling up slow and
hanging and waiting to die away.

"the bastuds, granny!" i said. "the bastuds!" then we were all three saying it--granny
and me and ringo, saying it together: "the bastuds!" we cried. "the bastuds! the bastuds!"


raid

granny wrote the note with pokeberry juice. "take it straight to mrs. compson and come
straight back," she said. "don't you-all stop anywhere."

miles to jefferson and back, with them two horses standing in the lot doing nothing?"

return them."

" 'fore god, miss rosa," philadelphy said, "i tried to stop him. i done tried."
"don't go, philadelphy," granny said. "don't you know--he's leading you into misery

philadelphy began to cry. "i knows hit. i knows whut they tole him can't be true. but

they went on. louvinia had come back; she and ringo were behind us. the smoke

"you mean we got to walk?" ringo said. "you gonter make us walk all them four

"they are borrowed horses," granny said. "i'm going to take care of them until i can

"i reckon you calls starting out to be gone you don't know where and you don't

"do you want me to whup you?" louvinia said.
"nome," ringo said.
we walked to jefferson and gave mrs. compson the note, and got the hat and the


know how long taking care of--" ringo said.



parasol and the hand mirror, and walked back home. that afternoon we greased the
wagon, and that night after supper granny got the pokeberry juice again and wrote on a
scrap of paper, "colonel nathaniel g. dick, --th ohio cavalry," and folded it and pinned it
inside her dress. "now i won't forget it," she said.

"if you was to, i reckon these hellion boys can remind you," louvinia said. "i reckon
they ain't forgot him. walking in that door just in time to keep them others from snatching
them out from under your dress and nailing them to the barn door like two coon hides."
"yes," granny said. "now we'll go to bed." we lived in joby's cabin then, with a red quilt
nailed by one edge to a rafter and hanging down to make two rooms. joby was waiting
with the wagon when granny came out with mrs. compson's hat on, and got into the
wagon and told ringo to open the parasol and took up the reins. then we all stopped and
watched joby stick something into the wagon beneath the quilts; it was the barrel and the
iron parts of the musket that ringo and i found in the ashes of the house.

of hit they mought think hit was the whole gun," he said.



while he took the musket barrel out of the wagon. granny gathered up the reins.




will load the chest in the wagon and loosh can lead the mules and we will come back
home."

started to memphis. she stood there holding to the wagon wheel and looked at granny
from under father's old hat, and began to holler. "don't you waste no time on colonels or
nothing!" she hollered. "you tell them niggers to send loosh to you, and you tell him to get
that chest and them mules, and then you whup him!" the wagon was moving now; she
had turned loose the wheel, and she walked along beside it, hollering at granny: "take
that pairsawl and wear hit out on him!"

chimneys standing up out of it; ringo and i found the insides of the big clock too. the sun
was just coming up, shining back on the chimneys; i could still see louvinia between them,
standing in front of the cabin, shading her eyes with her hand to watch us. joby was still
standing behind her, holding the musket barrel. they had broken the gates clean off; and

"take him with you," louvinia said. "leastways he can tend the horses."
"no," granny said. "don't you see i have got about all i can look after now?"
"then you stay here and lemme go," louvinia said. "i'll git um back."
"no," granny said. "i'll be all right. i shall inquire until i find colonel dick, and then we

"then what?" granny said. joby didn't look at anybody now.
"i was just doing what i could to help git the silver and the mules back," he said.
louvinia didn't say anything either. she and granny just looked at joby. after a

"what's that?" granny said. joby didn't look at her. "maybe if they just seed the end

then louvinia began to act just like uncle buck mccaslin did the morning we

"all right," granny said. the wagon went on; we passed the ash pile and the

we drove until dark, and camped. by sunup we were on the road again. "you

"i'll drive," granny said. "i was the one who borrowed them."
"you can tote this pairsawl a while, if you want something to do," ringo said. "and

then we were in the road. "don't you want me to drive?" i said. "i'll drive," granny said.
"these are borrowed horses."

"case even yankee could look at um and tell they couldn't keep up with even a
walking army," ringo said. "and i like to know how anybody can hurt this team lessen he
ain't got strength enough to keep um from laying down in the road and getting run over
with they own wagon."

better let me drive a while," i said.


give my arm a rest." i took the parasol and he laid down in the wagon and put his hat over
his eyes. "call me when we gittin nigh to hawkhurst," he said, "so i can commence to look
out for that railroad you tells about."
that was how he travelled for the next six days--lying on his back in the wagon bed

with his hat over his eyes, sleeping, or taking his turn holding the parasol over granny and
keeping me awake by talking of the railroad which he had never seen though i had seen
it that christmas we spent at hawkhurst. that's how ringo and i were. we were almost the
same age, and father always said that ringo was a little smarter than i was, but that didn't
count with us, anymore than the difference in the color of our skins counted. what
counted was, what one of us had done or seen that the other had not, and ever since
that christmas i had been ahead of ringo because i had seen a railroad, a locomotive.
only i know now it was more than that with ringo, though neither of us were to see the
proof of my belief for some time yet and we were not to recognise it as such even then. it
was as if ringo felt it too and that the railroad, the rushing locomotive which he hoped to
see symbolised it--the motion, the impulse to move which had already seethed to a head
among his people, darker than themselves, reasonless, following and seeking a delusion, a
dream, a bright shape which they could not know since there was nothing in their
heritage, nothing in the memory even of the old men to tell the others. 'this is what we will
find'; he nor they could not have known what it was yet it was there--one of those impulses
inexplicable yet invincible which appear among races of people at intervals and drive
them to pick up and leave all security and familiarity of earth and home and start out,
they don't know where, emptyhanded, blind to everything but a hope and a doom.

a country where nobody seemed to live at all; all that day we didn't even see a house. i
didn't ask and granny didn't say; she just sat there under the parasol with mrs. compson's
hat on and the horses walking and even our own dust moving ahead of us; after a while
even ringo sat up and looked around.


sudden ringo hollered, "look out! here they come again to git these uns!" we saw it, too,
then--a cloud of dust away to the west, moving slow--too slow for men riding--and then the
road we were on ran square into a big broad one running straight on into the east, as the
railroad at hawkhurst did when granny and i were there that christmas before the war; all
of a sudden i remembered it.

"we on the wrong road," he said. "ain't even nobody live here, let alone pass here."
but after a while the hills stopped, the road ran out flat and straight; and all of a

we went on; we didn't go fast. or maybe it seemed slow because we had got into

"can't you see um coming?" ringo hollered. "get on away from here!"
"they ain't yankees," granny said. "the yankees have already been here." then we


the dust, and the wagon stopped now with the horses' heads hanging and our dust
overtaking us again and the big dust cloud coming slow up in the west.


saw it, too--a burned house like ours, three chimneys standing above a mound of ashes,
and then we saw a white woman and a child looking at us from a cabin behind them.
granny looked at the dust cloud, then she looked at the empty broad road going on into
the east. "this is the way," she said. we went on. it seemed like we went slower than ever
now, with the dust cloud behind us and the burned houses and gins and thrown-down
fences on either side, and the white women and children--we never saw a nigger at all--
watching us from the nigger cabins where they lived now like we lived at home; we didn't
stop. "poor folks," granny said. "i wish we had enough to share with them."

at sunset we drew off the road and camped; ringo was looking back. "whatever
hit is, we done went off and left hit," he said. "i don't see no dust." we slept in the wagon
this time, all three of us. i don't know what time it was, only that all of a sudden i was
awake. granny was already sitting up in the wagon, i could see her head against the
branches and the stars. all of a sudden all three of us were sitting up in the wagon,
listening. they were coming up the road it sounded like about fifty of them; we could hear
the feet hurrying, and a kind of panting murmur. it was not singing exactly; it was not that
loud. it was just a sound, a breathing, a kind of gasping, murmuring chant and the feet
whispering fast in the deep dust. i could hear women, too, and then all of a sudden i
began to smell them. "niggers," i whispered. "sh-h-h-h," i whispered. we couldn't see them
and they did not see us; maybe they didn't even look, just walking fast in the dark with that
panting, hurrying murmuring, going on. and then the sun rose and we went on, too, along
that big broad empty road between the burned houses and gins and fences. before, it
had been like passing through a country where nobody had ever lived; now it was like
passing through one where everybody had died at the same moment. that night we
waked up three times and sat up in the wagon in the dark and heard niggers pass in the
road. the last time it was after dawn and we had already fed the horses. it was a big
crowd of them this time, and they sounded like they were running, like they had to run to
keep ahead of daylight. then they were gone. ringo and i had taken up the harness
again when granny said, "wait. hush." it was just one, we could hear her panting and
sobbing, and then we heard another sound. granny began to get down from the wagon.
"she fell," she said. "you-all hitch up and come on."

when we turned into the road, the woman was kind of crouched beside it, holding
something in her arms, and granny standing beside her. it was a baby, a few months old;
she held it like she thought maybe granny was going to take it away from her. "i been sick
and i couldn't keep up," she said. "they went off and left me." "is your husband with them?"
granny said. "yessum," the woman said. "they's all there." "who do you belong to?" granny
said. then she didn't answer. she squatted there in the dust, crouched over the baby. "if i
give you something to eat, will you turn around and go back home?" granny said. still she
didn't answer. she just squatted there. "you see you can't keep up with them and they ain't
going to wait for you," granny said. "do you want to die here in the road for buzzards to
eat?" but she didn't even look at granny; she just squatted there.


"this is the road to hawkhurst," i said. but ringo was not listening; he was looking at

"hit's jordan we coming to," she said. "jesus gonter see me that far."

"i'll get out here," she said. granny stopped the wagon and she got out. there was

"yessum," ringo said. "she done found um. reckon she gonter lose um again

we went on; we mounted the hill and crossed the crest of it. when i looked back

"get in the wagon," granny said. she got in; she squatted again just like she had in

the road, holding the baby and not looking at anything--just hunkered down and swaying
on her hams as the wagon rocked and jolted. the sun was up; we went down a long hill
and began to cross a creek bottom.

nothing at all but the thick gum and cypress and thick underbrush still full of shadow.

"you go back home, girl," granny said. she just stood there. "hand me the basket,"
granny said. i handed it to her and she opened it and gave the woman a piece of bread
and meat. we went on; we began to mount the hill. when i looked back she was still
standing there, holding the baby and the bread and meat granny had given her. she was
not looking at us. "were the others there in that bottom?" granny asked ringo.

tonight though."

this time the road was empty. that was the morning of the sixth day.


2

late that afternoon we were descending again; we came around a curve in the late level
shadows and our own quiet dust and i saw the graveyard on the knoll and the marble
shaft at uncle dennison's grave; there was a dove somewhere in the cedars. ringo was
asleep again under his hat in the wagon bed but he waked as soon as i spoke, even
though i didn't speak loud and didn't speak to him. "there's hawkhurst," i said.

"hawkhurst?" he said, sitting up. "where's that railroad?" on his knees now and
looking for something which he would have to find in order to catch up with me and
which he would have to recognise only through hearsay when he saw it: "where is it?
where?"


yankees done moved hit too."

where the house should have been and there was no house there. and i was not surprised;
i remember that; i was just feeling sorry for ringo, since (i was just fourteen then) if the
house was gone, they would have taken the railroad too, since anybody would rather
have a railroad than a house.
we didn't stop; we just looked quietly at the same mound of ashes, the same four

chimneys standing gaunt and blackened in the sun like the chimneys at home. when we
reached the gate cousin denny was running down the drive toward us. he was ten; he
ran up to the wagon with his eyes round and his mouth already open for hollering.



"you'll have to wait for it," i said.
"seem like i been waiting on hit all my life," he said. "i reckon you'll tell me next the

"denny," granny said, "do you know us?"
"yessum," cousin denny said. he looked at me, hollering, "come see--"

the sun was going down. because suddenly i saw it shining level across the place

"where's your mother?" granny said.
"in jingus' cabin," cousin denny said; he didn't even look at granny. "they burnt the



house!" he hollered. "come see what they done to the railroad!"

we ran, all three of us. granny hollered something and i turned and put the parasol
back into the wagon and hollered "yessum!" back at her, and ran on and caught up with
cousin denny and ringo in the road, and we ran on over the hill, and then it came in sight.
when granny and i were here before, cousin denny showed me the railroad, but he was
so little then that jingus had to carry him. it was the straightest thing i ever saw, running
straight and empty and quiet through a long empty gash cut through the trees, and the
ground, too; and full of sunlight like water in a river, only straighter than any river, with the
crossties cut off even and smooth and neat, and the light shining on the rails like on two
spider threads, running straight on to where you couldn't even see that far. it looked clean
and neat, like the yard behind louvinia's cabin after she had swept it on saturday
morning, with those two little threads that didn't look strong enough for anything to run on
running straight and fast and light, like they were getting up speed to jump clean off the
world.

denny, and we stood between the rails and he showed us where it would come from, and
then he showed us where the shadow of a dead pine would come to a stob he had
driven in the ground, and then you would hear the whistle. and we got back and
watched the shadow, and then we heard it; it whistled and then it got louder and louder
fast, and jingus went to the track and took his hat off and held it out with his face turned
back toward us and his mouth hollering, "watch now! watch!" even after we couldn't hear
him for the train; and then it passed. it came roaring up and went past; the river they had
cut through the trees was all full of smoke and noise and sparks and jumping brass, and
then empty again, and just jingus' old hat bouncing and jumping along the empty track
behind it like the hat was alive.

up every few yards, and we ran into the cut and we could see where they had dug the
ties up and piled them and set them on fire. but cousin denny was still hollering, "come
see what they done to the rails!" he said.

they were back in the trees; it looked like four or five men had taken each rail and
tied it around a tree like you knot a green cornstalk around a wagon stake, and ringo was
hollering, too, now.



like a squirrel?" ringo hollered. then we all heard the horse at once; we just had time to
look when bobolink came up the road out of the trees and went across the railroad and
into the trees again like a bird, with cousin drusilla riding astride like a man and sitting
straight and light as a willow branch in the wind. they said she was the best woman rider in
the country.

them niggers! come on!" he and ringo ran again. when i passed the chimneys, they were
just running into the stable. cousin drusilla had already unsaddled bobolink, and she was

"what's them?" he hollered. "what's them?"
"that's what it runs on!" cousin denny hollered.
"you mean hit have to come in here and run up and down around these here trees

jingus knew when the train would come; he held my hand and carried cousin

but this time what i saw was something that looked like piles of black straws heaped

"there's dru!" cousin denny hollered. "come on! she's been up to the river to see

"i'll tell about it at the house," cousin drusilla said. then she saw me. she was not tall;

"i'll tell you about that tonight too," drusilla said. "i'll finish bobolink for you," i said. "will

"hello," she said. "hello, john sartoris." she looked at ringo. "is this ringo?" she said.
"that's what they tells me," ringo said. "what about that railroad?"
"how are you?" cousin drusilla said. "i manages to stand hit," ringo said. "what

rubbing him down with a crokersack when i came in. cousin denny was still hollering,
"what did you see? what are they doing?"

it was the way she stood and walked. she had on pants, like a man. she was the best
woman rider in the country. when granny and i were here that christmas before the war
and gavin breckbridge had just given bobolink to her, they looked fine together; it didn't
need jingus to say that they were the finest-looking couple in alabama or mississippi either.
but gavin was killed at shiloh and so they didn't marry. she came and put her hand on my
shoulder.



about that railroad?"

you?" she said. she went to bobolink's head. "will you stand for cousin bayard, lad?" she
said. "i'll see you-all at the house, then," she said. she went out. "yawl sho must 'a' had this
horse hid good when the yankees come," ringo said.

horse no more." he didn't holler now, but pretty soon he began again: "when they come
to burn the house, dru grabbed the pistol and run out here--she had on her sunday dress--
and them right behind her. she run in here and she jumped on bobolink bareback, without
even waiting for the bridle, and one of them right there in the door hollering, 'stop,' and
dru said, 'get away, or i'll ride you down,' and him hollering, 'stop! stop!' with his pistol out
too"--cousin denny was hollering good now--"and dru leaned down to bobolink's ear and
said, 'kill him, bob,' and the yankee jumped back just in time. the lot was full of them, too,
and dru stopped bobolink and jumped down in her sunday dress and put the pistol to
bobolink's ear and said, 'i can't shoot you all, because i haven't enough bullets, and it
wouldn't do any good anyway; but i won't need but one shot for the horse, and which
shall it be?' so they burned the house and went away!" he was hollering good now, with
ringo staring at him so you could have raked ringo's eyes off his face with a stick. "come
on!" cousin denny hollered. "le's go hear about them niggers at the river!"

that railroad."

mostly, though it was not about the railroad. her hair was cut short; it looked like father's
would when he would tell granny about him and the men cutting each other's hair with a
bayonet. she was sunburned and her hands were hard and scratched like a man's that
works. she was telling granny mostly: "they began to pass in the road yonder while the
house was still burning. we couldn't count them; men and women carrying children who
couldn't walk and carrying old men and women who should have been at home waiting
to die. they were singing, walking along the road singing, not even looking to either side.
the dust didn't even settle for two days, because all that night they still passed; we sat up
listening to them, and the next morning every few yards along the road would be the old
ones who couldn't keep up any more, sitting or lying down and even crawling along,
calling to the others to help them; and the others--the young strong ones--not stopping,

"this horse?" cousin denny said. "ain't no damn yankee going to fool with dru's

"i been having to hear about niggers all my life," ringo said. "i got to hear about

when we reached the house cousin drusilla was already talking, telling granny

"that was what loosh said," granny said. "that general sherman was leading them

"yes," cousin drusilla said. "the river. they have stopped there; it's like a river itself,

"drusilla," aunt louise said, "you're not going back tomorrow or any other time."
"they are going to mine the bridge and blow it up when the army has crossed,"

not even looking at them. i don't think they even heard or saw them. 'going to jordan,'
they told me. 'going to cross jordan.' "

all to jordan."

dammed up. the yankees have thrown out a brigade of cavalry to hold them back while
they build the bridge to cross the infantry and artillery; they are all right until they get up
there and see or smell the water. that's when they go mad. not fighting; it's like they can't
even see the horses shoving them back and the scabbards beating them; it's like they
can't even see anything but the water and the other bank. they aren't angry, aren't
fighting; just men, women and children singing and chanting and trying to get to that
unfinished bridge or even down into the water itself, and the cavalry beating them back
with sword scabbards. i don't know when they have eaten; nobody knows just how far
some of them have come. they just pass here without food or anything, exactly as they
rose up from whatever they were doing when the spirit or the voice or whatever it was told
them to go. they stop during the day and rest in the woods; then, at night, they move
again. we will hear them later--i'll wake you--marching on up the road until the cavalry
stops them. there was an officer, a major, who finally took time to see i wasn't one of his
men; he said, 'can't you do anything with them? promise them anything to go back
home?' but it was like they couldn't see me or hear me speaking; it was only that water
and that bank on the other side. but you will see for yourself tomorrow, when we go back."


cousin drusilla said. "nobody knows what they will do then."

themselves; let them pay the price."

one person there who is not a yankee either." she looked at granny. "four, counting
bayard and ringo."

thank me to do so."


granny. she 'cide what she want and then she kneel down about ten seconds and tell
god what she aim to do, and then she git up and do hit. and them that don't like hit can
git outen the way or git trompled. but that railroad--"

i had to hear about the railroad too; possibly it was more the need to keep even with
ringo (or even ahead of him, since i had seen the railroad when it was a railroad, which
he had not) than a boy's affinity for smoke and fury and thunder and speed. we sat there
in that slave cabin partitioned, like louvinia's cabin at home, into two rooms by that
suspended quilt beyond which aunt louisa and granny were already in bed and where
cousin denny should have been too except for the evening's dispensation he had
received, listening too who did not need to hear it again since he had been there to see it
when it happened;--we sat there, ringo and i, listening to cousin drusilla and staring at

"those negroes are not yankees, mother," cousin drusilla said. "at least there will be

aunt louise looked at granny. "rosa, you shan't go. i forbid it. brother john will

"i reckon i will," granny said. "i've got to get the silver anyway."
"and the mules," ringo said; "don't forget them. and don't yawl worry about

"but we cannot be responsible," aunt louise said. "the yankees brought it on

"and now i reckon we better go to bed," granny said. but we didn't go to bed then.

each other with the same amazed and incredulous question: where could we have been
at that moment? what could we have been doing, even a hundred miles away, not to
have sensed, felt this, paused to look at one another, aghast and uplifted, while it was
happening? because this, to us, was it. ringo and i had seen yankees; we had shot at one;
we had crouched like two rats and heard granny, unarmed and not even rising from her
chair, rout a whole regiment of them from the library. and we had heard about battles
and fighting and seen those who had taken part in them, not only in the person of father
when once or twice each year and without warning he would appear on the strong gaunt
horse, arrived from beyond that cloudbank region which ringo believed was tennessee,
but in the persons of other men who returned home with actual arms and legs missing. but
that was it: men had lost arms and legs in sawmills; old men had been telling young men
and boys about wars and fighting before they discovered how to write it down: and what
petty precisian to quibble about locations in space or in chronology, who to care or insist
now come, old man, tell the truth: did you see this? were you really there? because wars
are wars: the same exploding powder when there was powder, the same thrust and parry
of iron when there was not--one tale, one telling, the same as the next or the one before.
so we knew a war existed; we had to believe that, just as we had to believe that the
name for the sort of life we had led for the last three years was hardship and suffering. yet
we had no proof of it. in fact, we had even less than no proof; we had had thrust into our
faces the very shabby and unavoidable obverse of proof, who had seen father (and the
other men too) return home, afoot like tramps or on crow-bait horses, in faded and
patched (and at times obviously stolen) clothing, preceded by no flags nor drums and
followed not even by two men to keep step with one another, in coats bearing no glitter
of golden braid and with scabbards in which no sword reposed, actually almost sneaking
home to spend two or three or seven days performing actions not only without glory
(plowing land, repairing fences, killing meat for the smokehouse) and in which they had no
skill but the very necessity for which was the fruit of the absent occupations from which,
returning, they bore no proof--actions in the very clumsy performance of which father's
whole presence seemed (to us, ringo and me) to emanate a kind of humility and
apology, as if he were saying, "believe me, boys; take my word for it: there's more to it than
this, no matter what it looks like. i can't prove it, so you'll just have to believe me." and then
to have it happen, where we could have been there to see it, and were not: and this no
poste and riposte of sweat-reeking cavalry which all war-telling is full of, no galloping
thunder of guns to wheel up and unlimber and crash and crash into the lurid grime-glare
of their own demon-served inferno which even children would recognise, no ragged lines
of gaunt and shrill-yelling infantry beneath a tattered flag which is a very part of that
child's make-believe. because this was it: an interval, a space, in which the toad-squatting
guns, the panting men and the trembling horses paused, amphitheatric about the
embattled land, beneath the fading fury of the smoke and the puny yelling, and
permitted the sorry business which had dragged on for three years now to be congealed
into an irrevocable instant and put to an irrevocable gambit, not by two regiments or two
batteries or even two generals, but by two locomotives.

whitewash and even (still faintly) of negroes. she probably told us the reason for it (she
must have known)--what point of strategy, what desperate gamble not for preservation,
since hope of that was gone, but at least for prolongation, which it served. but that meant
nothing to us. we didn't hear, we didn't even listen; we sat there in that cabin and waited
and watched that railroad which no longer existed, which was now a few piles of charred
ties among which green grass was already growing, a few threads of steel knotted and

cousin drusilla told it while we sat there in the cabin which smelled of new

twisted about the trunks of trees and already annealing into the living bark, becoming one
and indistinguishable with the jungle growth which had now accepted it, but which for us
ran still pristine and intact and straight and narrow as the path to glory itself, as it ran for all
of them who were there and saw when ringo and i were not. drusilla told about that too;
'atlanta' and 'chattanooga' were in it--the names, the beginning and the end--but they
meant no more to us than they did to the other watchers--the black and the white, the old
men, the children, the women who would not know for months yet if they were widows or
childless or not--gathered, warned by grapevine, to see the momentary flash and glare of
indomitable spirit starved by three years free of the impeding flesh. she told it (and now
ringo and i began to see it; we were there too)--the roundhouse in atlanta where the
engine waited; we were there, we were of them who (they must have) would slip into the
roundhouse in the dark, to caress the wheels and pistons and iron flanks, to whisper to it in
the darkness like lover to mistress or rider to horse, cajoling ruthlessly of her or it one
supreme effort in return for making which she or it would receive annihilation (and who
would not pay the price), cajoling, whispering, caressing her or it toward the one moment;
we were of them--the old men, the children, the women--gathered to watch, drawn and
warned by that grapevine of the oppressed, deprived of everything now save the will and
the ability to deceive, turning inscrutable and impassive secret faces to the blue enemies
who lived among them. because they knew it was going to happen; drusilla told that too:
how they seemed to know somehow the very moment when the engine left atlanta; it was
as if the gray generals themselves had sent the word, had told them, "you have suffered
for three years; now we will give to you and your children a glimpse of that for which you
have suffered and been denied." because that's all it was. i know that now. even the
successful passage of a hundred engines with trains of cars could not have changed the
situation or its outcome; certainly not two free engines shrieking along a hundred yards
apart up that drowsing solitude of track which had seen no smoke and heard no bell in
more than a year. i don't think it was intended to do that. it was like a meeting between
two iron knights of the old time, not for material gain but for principle--honor denied with
honor, courage denied with courage--the deed done not for the end but for the sake of
the doing--put to the ultimate test and proving nothing save the finality of death and the
vanity of all endeavor. we saw it, we were there, as if drusilla's voice had transported us to
the wandering light-ray in space in which was still held the furious shadow--the brief section
of track which existed inside the scope of a single pair of eyes and nowhere else, coming
from nowhere and having, needing, no destination, the engine not coming into view but
arrested in human sight in thunderous yet dreamy fury, lonely, inviolate and forlorn, wailing
through its whistle precious steam which could have meant seconds at the instant of
passing and miles at the end of its journey (and cheap at ten times this price)--the flaring
and streaming smoke stack, the tossing bell, the starred saint andrew's cross nailed to the
cab roof, the wheels and the flashing driving rods on which the brass fittings glinted like the
golden spurs themselves--then gone, vanished. only not gone or vanished either, so long
as there should be defeated or the descendants of defeated to tell it or listen to the telling.

"the other one, the yankee one, was right behind it," drusilla said. "but they never
caught it. then the next day they came and tore the track up. they tore the track up so
we couldn't do it again; they could tear the track up but they couldn't take back the fact
that we had done it. they couldn't take that from us."

before ringo went on to miss lena's cabin, where he was to sleep. "i know what you
thinking," ringo said. father was right; he was smarter than me. "but i heard good as you
did. i heard every word you heard."

we--ringo and i--knew what she meant; we stood together just outside the door

he went on, then i went back into the house and behind the quilt where denny

she was outside the cabin; she hadn't undressed even. i could see her in the

"only i saw the track before they tore it up. i saw where it was going to happen."
"but you didn't know hit was fixing to happen when you seed the track. so nemmine



that. i heard. and i reckon they ain't gonter git that away from me, neither."

was already asleep on the pallet. drusilla was not there only i didn't have time to wonder
where she was because i was thinking how i probably wouldn't be able to go to sleep at
all now though it was late. then it was later still and denny was shaking me and i
remember how i thought then that he did not seem to need sleep either, that just by
having been exposed for three or four seconds to war he had even at just ten acquired
that quality which father and the other men brought back from the front--the power to do
without sleep and food both, needing only the opportunity to endure. "dru says to come
on out doors if you want to hear them passing," he whispered.

starlight--her short jagged hair and the man's shirt and pants. "hear them?" she said. we
could hear it again, like we had in the wagon--the hurrying feet, the sound like they were
singing in panting whispers, hurrying on past the gate and dying away up the road. "that's
the third tonight," cousin drusilla said. "two passed while i was down at the gate. you were
tired, and so i didn't wake you before."
"i thought it was late," i said. "you haven't been to bed even. have you?"

"no," she said. "i've quit sleeping."

"quit sleeping?" i said. "why?"


she looked at me. i was as tall as she was; we couldn't see each other's faces; it
was just her head with the short jagged hair like she had cut it herself without bothering
about a mirror, and her neck that had got thin and hard like her hands since granny and i
were here before. "i'm keeping a dog quiet," she said.


to show it the stick now and then." she was looking at me. "why not stay awake now? who
wants to sleep now, with so much happening, so much to see? living used to be dull, you
see. stupid. you lived in the same house your father was born in, and your father's sons and
daughters had the sons and daughters of the same negro slaves to nurse and coddle;
and then you grew up and you fell in love with your acceptable young man, and in time
you would marry him, in your mother's wedding gown, perhaps, and with the same silver
for presents she had received; and then you settled down forevermore while you got
children to feed and bathe and dress until they grew up, too; and then you and your
husband died quietly and were buried together maybe on a summer afternoon just before
suppertime. stupid, you see. but now you can see for yourself how it is; it's fine now; you
don't have to worry now about the house and the silver, because they get burned up and
carried away; and you don't have to worry about the negroes, because they tramp the
roads all night waiting for a chance to drown in homemade jordan; and you don't have
to worry about getting children to bathe and feed and change, because the young men
can ride away and get killed in the fine battles; and you don't even have to sleep alone,
you don't even have to sleep at all; and so, all you have to do is show the stick to the dog
now and then and say, 'thank god for nothing.' you see? there. they've gone now. and
you'd better get back to bed, so we can get an early start in the morning. it will take a
long time to get through them."

"a dog?" i said. "i haven't seen any dog."
"no. it's quiet now," she said. "it doesn't bother anybody any more now. i just have

we began to see the dust almost at once and i even believed that i could already

"you're not coming in now?" i said.


"not yet," she said. but we didn't move. and then she put her hand on my shoulder.
"listen," she said. "when you go back home and see uncle john, ask him to let me come
there and ride with his troop. tell him i can ride, and maybe i can learn to shoot. will you?"

"yes," i said. "i'll tell him you are not afraid too." "aren't i?" she said. "i hadn't thought
about it. it doesn't matter anyway. just tell him i can ride and that i don't get tired." her
hand was on my shoulder; it felt thin and hard. "will you do that for me? ask him to let me
come, bayard."
"all right," i said. then i said, "i hope he will let you."

"so do i," she said. "now you go back to bed. good night."


i went back to the pallet and then to sleep; again it was denny shaking me awake;
by sunup we were on the road again, drusilla on bobolink riding beside the wagon. but not
for long.

smell them though the distance between us did not appreciably decrease, since they
were travelling almost as fast as we were. we never did overtake them, just as you do not
overtake a tide. you just keep moving, then suddenly you know that the set is about you,
beneath you, overtaking you, as if the slow and ruthless power, become aware of your
presence at last, had dropped back a tentacle, a feeler, to gather you in and sweep you
remorselessly on. singly, in couples, in groups and families they began to appear from the
woods, ahead of us, alongside of us and behind; they covered and hid from sight the road
exactly as an infiltration of flood water would have, hiding the road from sight and then
the very wheels of the wagon in which we rode, our two horses as well as bobolink
breasting slowly on, enclosed by a mass of heads and shoulders--men and women
carrying babies and dragging older children by the hand, old men and women on
improvised sticks and crutches, and very old ones sitting beside the road and even calling
to us when we passed; there was one old woman who even walked along beside the
wagon, holding to the bed and begging granny to at least let her see the river before she
died. but mostly they did not look at us. we might not have even been there. we did not
even ask them to let us through because we could look at their faces and know they
couldn't have heard us. they were not singing yet, they were just hurrying, while our horses
pushed slow through them, among the blank eyes not looking at anything out of faces
caked with dust and sweat, breasting slowly and terrifically through them as if we were
driving in midstream up a creek full of floating logs and the dust and the smell of them
everywhere and granny in mrs. compson's hat sitting bolt upright under the parasol which
ringo held and looking sicker and sicker, and it already afternoon though we didn't know
it anymore than we knew how many miles we had come. then all of a sudden we
reached the river, where the cavalry was holding them back from the bridge. it was just a
sound at first, like wind, like it might be in the dust itself. we didn't even know what it was
until we saw drusilla holding bobolink reined back, her face turned toward us wan and
small above the dust and her mouth open and crying thinly: "look out, aunt rosa! oh, look
out!"

it was like we all heard it at the same time--we in the wagon and on the horse, they
all around us in the sweat-caking dust. they made a kind of long wailing sound, and then i
felt the whole wagon lift clear of the ground and begin to rush forward. i saw our old rib-
gaunted horses standing on their hind feet one minute and then turned sideways in the
traces the next, and drusilla leaning forward a little and taut as a pistol hammer holding

they were fighting now, the horses rearing and shoving against them, the troopers

bobolink, and i saw men and women and children going down under the horses and we
could feel the wagon going over them and we could hear them screaming. and we
couldn't stop anymore than if the earth had tilted up and was sliding us all down toward
the river.

it went fast, like that, like it did every time anybody named sartoris or millard came
within sight, hearing or smell of yankees, as if yankees were not a people nor a belief nor
even a form of behavior, but instead were a kind of gully, precipice, into which granny
and ringo and i were sucked pell-mell every time we got close to them. it was sunset; now
there was a high bright rosy glow quiet beyond the trees and shining on the river, and now
we could see it plain--the tide of niggers dammed back from the entrance to the bridge
by a detachment of cavalry, the river like a sheet of rosy glass beneath the delicate arch
of the bridge which the tail of the yankee column was just crossing. they were in silhouette,
running tiny and high above the placid water; i remember the horses' and mules' heads all
mixed up among the bayonets, and the barrels of cannon tilted up and kind of rushing
slow across the high peaceful rosy air like splitcane clothespins being jerked along a
clothesline, and the singing everywhere up and down the river bank, with the voices of the
women coming out of it thin and high: "glory! glory! hallelujah!"

beating at them with their scabbards, holding them clear of the bridge while the last of
the infantry began to cross; all of a sudden there was an officer beside the wagon, holding
his scabbarded sword by the little end like a stick and hanging onto the wagon and
screaming at us. i don't know where he came from, how he ever got to us, but there he
was with his little white face with a stubble of beard and a long streak of blood on it,
bareheaded and with his mouth open. "get back!" he shrieked. "get back! we're going to
blow the bridge!" screaming right into granny's face while she shouted back at him with
mrs. compson's hat knocked to one side of her head and hers and the yankee's face not
a yard apart:

"i want my silver! i'm john sartoris' mother-in-law! send colonel dick to me!" then
the yankee officer was gone, right in the middle of shouting and beating at the nigger
heads with his sabre, with his little bloody shrieking face and all. i don't know where he
went anymore than i know where he came from: he just vanished still holding onto the
wagon and flailing about him with the sabre, and then cousin drusilla was there on
bobolink; she had our nigh horse by the head-stall and was trying to turn the wagon
sideways. i started to jump down to help. "stay in the wagon," she said. she didn't shout;
she just said it. "take the lines and turn them." when we got the wagon turned sideways we
stopped. and then for a minute i thought we were going backward, until i saw it was the
niggers. then i saw that the cavalry had broken; i saw the whole mob of it--horses and
men and sabres and niggers--rolling on toward the end of the bridge like when a dam
breaks, for about ten clear seconds behind the last of the infantry. and then the bridge
vanished. i was looking right at it; i could see the clear gap between the infantry and the
wave of niggers and cavalry, with a little empty thread of bridge joining them together in
the air above the water, and then there was a bright glare and i felt my insides suck and a
clap of wind hit me on the back of the head. i didn't hear anything at all. i just sat there in
the wagon with a funny buzzing in my ears and a funny taste in my mouth, and watched
little toy men and horses and pieces of plank floating along in the air above the water. but
i didn't hear anything at all; i couldn't even hear cousin drusilla. she was right beside the
wagon now, leaning toward us, her mouth urgent and wide and no sound coming out of it
at all.

"what?" i said.
"stay in the wagon!"
"i can't hear you!" i said. that's what i said, that's what i was thinking; i didn't realise

"we better take her to the hospital," one of them said. granny opened her eyes;

"get away!" i said. "the wagon will float!"
"yes," she said, "it will float. just stay in it. watch aunt rosa and ringo."
"yes," i said. then she was gone. we passed her; turned, and holding bobolink like a




even then that the wagon was moving again. but then i did; it was like the whole long
bank of the river had turned and risen under us and was rushing us down toward the
water, we sitting in the wagon and rushing down toward the water on another river of
faces that couldn't see or hear either. cousin drusilla had the nigh horse by the bridle
again, and i dragged at them, too, and granny was standing up in the wagon and
beating at the faces with mrs. compson's parasol, and then the whole rotten bridle came
off in cousin drusilla's hand.



rock again and leaning down talking to him and patting his cheek, she was gone. then
maybe the bank did cave. i don't know. i didn't even know we were in the river. it was just
like the earth had fallen out from under the wagon and the faces and all, and we all
rushed down slow, with the faces looking up and their eyes blind and their mouths open
and their arms held up. high up in the air across the river i saw a cliff and a big fire on it
running fast sideways; and then all of a sudden the wagon was moving fast sideways, and
then a dead horse came shining up from out of the yelling faces and went down slow
again, exactly like a fish feeding, with, hanging over his rump by one stirrup, a man in a
black uniform, and then i realised that the uniform was blue, only it was wet. they were
screaming then, and now i could feel the wagon bed tilt and slide as they caught at it.
granny was kneeling beside me now, hitting at the screaming faces with mrs. compson's
parasol. behind us they were still marching down the bank and into the river, singing.


3

a yankee patrol helped ringo and me cut the drowned horses out of the harness and
drag the wagon ashore. we sprinkled water on granny until she came to, and they rigged
harness with ropes and hitched up two of their horses. there was a road on top of the bluff,
and then we could see the fires along the bank. they were still singing on the other side of
the river, but it was quieter now. but there were patrols still riding up and down the cliff on
this side, and squads of infantry down at the water where the fires were. then we began to
pass between rows of tents, with granny lying against me, and i could see her face then; it
was white and still, and her eyes were shut. she looked old and tired; i hadn't realised how
old and little she was. then we began to pass big fires, with niggers in wet clothes
crouching around them and soldiers going among them passing out food; then we came
to a broad street, and stopped before a tent with a sentry at the door and a light inside.
the soldiers looked at granny.

she tried to sit up. "no," she said. "just take me to colonel dick. i will be all right then."

they carried her into the tent and put her in a chair. she hadn't moved; she was

it was hot in the tent, and quiet, with three bugs swirling around the lantern, and

"they took the silver and the darkies and the mules," granny said. "i have come to

"maybe you can describe them," colonel dick said to me.
"i will do it," granny said. she didn't open her eyes. "the chest of silver tied with

colonel dick turned and watched the orderly writing. "have you got that?" he said.
the orderly looked at what he had written. "i guess the general will be glad to give


sitting there with her eyes closed and a strand of wet hair sticking to her face when
colonel dick came in. i had never seen him before--only heard his voice while ringo and i
were squatting under granny's skirt and holding our breath--but i knew him at once, with
his bright beard and his hard bright eyes, stooping over granny and saying, "damn this
war. damn it. damn it."

get them."

"have them you shall," he said, "if they are anywhere in this corps. i'll see the general
myself." he was looking at ringo and me now. "ha!" he said. "i believe we have met before
also." then he was gone again.

outside the sound of the army like wind far away. ringo was already asleep, sitting on the
ground with his head on his knees, and i wasn't much better, because all of a sudden
colonel dick was back and there was an orderly writing at the table, and granny sitting
again with her eyes closed in her white face.


hemp rope. the rope was new. two darkies, loosh and philadelphy. the mules, old
hundred and tinney."


them twice the silver and mules just for taking that many niggers," he said.


to wake me and ringo both; we were in the wagon again, with two army horses pulling it
on down the long broad street, and there was another officer with us and colonel dick
was gone. we came to a pile of chests and boxes that looked higher than a mountain.
there was a rope pen behind it full of mules and then, standing to one side and waiting
there, was what looked like a thousand niggers, men, women and children, with their wet
clothes dried on them. and now it began to go fast again; there was granny in the wagon
with her eyes wide open now and the lieutenant reading from the paper and the soldiers
jerking chests and trunks out of the pile. "ten chests tied with hemp rope," the lieutenant
read. "get them? . . . a hundred and ten mules. it says from philadelphia--that's in
mississippi. get these mississippi mules. they are to have rope and halters."


madam."

little, with her hand at her chest. "but they're not--they ain't--" she said.

another hundred with his compliments."


"now i'll go see the general," colonel dick said.
then we were moving again. i don't know how long it had been, because they had

"we ain't got a hundred and ten mississippi mules," the sergeant said.
"get what we have got. hurry." he turned to granny. "and there are your niggers,

granny was looking at him with her eyes wide as ringo's. she was drawn back a

"they ain't all yours?" the lieutenant said. "i know it. the general said to give you

"but that ain't--we didn't--" granny said.

"she wants the house back, too," the sergeant said. "we ain't got any houses,

"they done found hit out and headed us off," ringo said. it was too late; already an

"i will tell them the truth," granny said. "we have done nothing." she sat there,

we opened the paper and looked at it, at the neat writing:
field headquarters,
--th army corps,
department of tennessee, august 14, 1863
to all brigade, regimental and other commanders: you will see that bearer is


grandma," he said. "you'll just have to make out with trunks and niggers and mules. you
wouldn't have room for it on the wagon, anyway." we sat there while they loaded the ten
trunks into the wagon. it just did hold them all. they got another set of trees and harness,
and hitched four mules to it. "one of you darkies that can handle two span come here,"
the lieutenant said. one of the niggers came and got on the seat with granny; none of us
had ever seen him before. behind us they were leading the mules out of the pen.
"you want to let some of the women ride?" the lieutenant said.

"yes," granny whispered.


"come on," the lieutenant said. "just one to a mule, now." then he handed me the
paper. "here you are. there's a ford about twenty miles up the river; you can cross there.
you better get on away from here before any more of these niggers decide to go with
you."

we rode until daylight, with the ten chests in the wagon and the mules and our
army of niggers behind. granny had not moved, sitting there beside the strange nigger
with mrs. compson's hat on and the parasol in her hand. but she was not asleep, because
when it got light enough to see, she said, "stop the wagon." the wagon stopped. she
turned and looked at me. "let me see that paper," she said.





repossessed in full of the following property, to wit: ten (10) chests tied with hemp rope and
containing silver. one hundred ten (110) mules captured loose near philadelphia in
mississippi. one hundred ten (110) negroes of both sexes belonging to and having strayed
from the same locality.

expedite his passage to his destination.


now," ringo said. granny looked at me. "we can get food and fodder too," i said.

of god."

we stopped and slept until noon. that afternoon we came to the ford. we had
already started down the bluff when we saw the troop of cavalry camped there. it was
too late to stop.

officer and two men were riding toward us.

drawn back a little again, with her hand already raised and holding the paper out in the
other when they rode up. the officer was a heavy-built man with a red face; he looked at

"yes," granny said. "i tried to tell them better. you and ringo heard me. it's the hand

you will further see that bearer is supplied with necessary food and forage to

by order of the general commanding.
we looked at one another in the gray light. "i reckon you gonter take um back

"do we--" granny said, with her hand to her chest, looking at him; i reckon it was

the man counted the mules; we didn't move; i don't think we even breathed

"forty-seven will do," ringo said. "only i reckon maybe we better eat something, like

we crossed the ford. we didn't stop; we went on as soon as they brought up the

"how many do you lack?" he said.
"how many do i what?" granny said.
"mules!" the officer shouted. "mules! mules! do i look like i had any chests of silver or

us and took the paper and read it and began to swear. he sat there on his horse swearing
while we watched him.



niggers tied with hemp rope?"

ringo that knew first what he meant.

"we like fifty," ringo said.

"fifty, hey?" the officer said. he cursed again; he turned to one of the men behind
him and cursed him now. "count 'em!" he said. "do you think i'm going to take their word
for it?"

hardly. "sixty-three," the man said.

the officer looked at us. "sixty-three from a hundred and ten leaves forty-seven," he
said. he cursed. "get forty-seven mules! hurry!" he looked at us again. "think you can beat
me out of three mules, hey?"

the paper mention."

other mules, and some more of the women got on them. we went on. it was after
sundown then, but we didn't stop.


was looking at. "ringo," she said.
"i never said nothing the paper never said," ringo said. "hit was the one that said it;

hit wasn't me. all i done was to told him how much the hundred and ten liked; i never said
we liked that many. 'sides, hit ain't no use in praying about hit now; ain't no telling what we
gonter run into 'fore we gits home. the main thing now is, whut we gonter do with all these
niggers."

granny told all the niggers that lived in alabama to come forward. it was about half of
them. "i suppose you all want to cross some more rivers and run after the yankee army,
don't you?" granny said. they stood there, moving their feet in the dust. "what? don't any
of you want to?" they just stood there. "then who are you going to mind from now on?"
after a while, one of them said, "you, missy." "all right," granny said. "now listen to me. go
home. and if i ever hear of any of you straggling off like this again, i'll see to it. now line up
and come up here one at a time while we divide the food."

almost enough mules for everybody to ride, but not quite, and ringo drove now. he didn't
ask; he just got in and took the reins, with granny on the seat by him; it was just once that
she told him not to go so fast. so i rode in the back then, on one of the chests, and that
afternoon i was asleep; it was the wagon stopping that woke me. we had just come down

"hah!" ringo said. "whose hand was that?"
we went on until midnight before we stopped. this time it was ringo that granny

"yes," granny said. we cooked and ate the food the cavalry officer gave us; then

it took a long time until the last one was gone; when we started again, we had

"you, ringo," granny whispered. "all right," ringo said. "you want me to tell um to

"this says mules, not horses," he said.
"just the first hundred was mules," ringo said. "the extra twelve is horses."
"damn it!" the lieutenant said. he sounded like a girl swearing. "i told captain

"they ain't hardly worth fooling with," ringo said. "still, they's horses."
"we've already got a hundred and ten," granny said. "that's all the paper calls for."
"all right," ringo said. "you wanter go on?" granny didn't answer, sitting there drawn

a hill onto a flat, and then i saw them beyond a field, about a dozen of them, cavalry in
blue coats. they hadn't seen us yet, trotting along, while granny and ringo watched
them.



back a little, with her hand at her breast again. "well, what you wanter do?" ringo said.
"you got to 'cide quick, or they be gone." he looked at her; she didn't move. ringo leaned
out of the wagon. "hey!" he hollered. they looked back quick and saw us and whirled
about. "granny say come here!" ringo hollered.

never mind?" she didn't answer; she was looking past ringo at the two yankees who were
riding toward us across the field, with that kind of drawnback look on her face and her
hand holding the front of her dress. it was a lieutenant and a sergeant; the lieutenant
didn't look much older than ringo and me. he saw granny and took off his hat. and then
all of a sudden she took her hand away from her chest; it had the paper in it; she held it
out to the lieutenant without saying a word. the lieutenant opened it, the sergeant looking
over his shoulder. then the sergeant looked at us.



bowen not to mount us with captured stock!"


general's own signature!"

so then we had enough stock for all of them to ride except about fifteen or twenty.
we went on. the soldiers stood under a tree by the road, with their saddles and bridles on
the ground beside them--all but the lieutenant. when we started again, he ran along by
the wagon; he looked like he was going to cry, trotting along by the wagon with his hat in
his hand, looking at granny.

where we are and to send us something--mounts or wagons--anything we can ride in? you
won't forget?"

mules," ringo said. "but when we sees any more of um, we'll tell um about yawl."

want to stop and send the lieutenant's message in, but granny made him stop and we
sent the message in by one of the niggers.


us we were in mississippi again, and then, in the afternoon, we came over the hill, and
there our chimneys were, standing up into the sunlight, and the cabin behind them and

"you mean you're going to give them the horses?" the sergeant said.
"what else can i do?" the lieutenant said. he looked like he was fixing to cry. "it's the

"you'll meet some troops somewhere," he said. "i know you will. will you tell them

"they's some of yawl about twenty or thirty miles back that claim to have three extry

we went on. we came in sight of a town, but we went around it; ringo didn't even

"that's one more mouth to feed we got shed of," ringo said.
we went on. we went fast now, changing the mules every few miles; a woman told

"stop the wagon," granny said.
we stopped--the wagon, the hundred and twenty-two mules and horses, and the

"but they stole them 'fore we did," ringo said.
"but we lied," granny said. "kneel down." she knelt first. then we all three knelt by

"hit was the paper that lied; hit wasn't us," ringo said.
"the paper said a hundred and ten. we have a hundred and twenty-two," granny

louvinia bending over a washtub and the clothes on the line, flapping bright and
peaceful.


niggers we never had had time to count.

granny got out slow and turned to ringo. "get out," she said; then she looked at
me. "you too," she said. "because you said nothing at all." we got out of the wagon. she
looked at us. "we have lied," she said.


said. "kneel down."


the road while she prayed. the washing blew soft and peaceful and bright on the
clothesline. and then louvinia saw us; she was already running across the pasture while
granny was praying.


riposte in tertio

ab snopes left for memphis with the nine mules, ringo and joby and i worked on a new
fence. then ringo went off on his mule and there was just joby and me. once granny
came down and looked at the new section of rails; the pen would be almost two acres
larger now. that was the second day after ringo left. that night, while granny and i were
sitting before the fire, ab snopes came back. he said that he had got only four hundred
and fifty dollars for the nine mules. that is, he took some money out of his pocket and gave
it to granny, and she counted it and said: "that's only fifty dollars apiece." "all right," ab
said. "if you can do any better, you are welcome to take the next batch in yourself. i done
already admitted i can't hold a candle to you when it comes to getting mules; maybe i
can't even compete with you when it comes to selling them." he chewed something--
tobacco when he could get it, willow bark when he couldn't--all the time, and he never
wore a collar, and nobody ever admitted they ever saw him in a uniform, though when
father was away, he would talk a lot now and then about when he was in father's troop
and about what he and father used to do. but when i asked father about it once, father
said, "who? ab snopes?" and then laughed. but it was father that told ab to kind of look
out for granny while he was away; only he told me and ringo to look out for ab, too, that
ab was all right in his way, but he was like a mule: while you had him in the traces, you
better watch him.

to memphis and came back with the money, it would be like this: "yes, ma'am," ab said.
"it's easy to talk about hit, setting here without no risk. but i'm the one that has to dodge
them durn critters nigh a hundred miles into memphis, with forrest and smith fighting on
ever side of me and me never knowing when i wull run into a confed'rit or yankee patrol
and have ever last one of them confiscated off of me right down to the durn halters. and

but ab and granny got along all right, though each time ab took a batch of mules

"i suppose you consider getting them back for you to sell taking no risk," granny

"the risk of running out of them printed letterheads, sho," ab said. "if you ain't

she just looked like somebody that has quit sleeping at night.
"we have more mules," she said, "if you would just sell them. there are more than a

then i got to take them into the very heart of the yankee army in memphis and try to sell
them to a e-quipment officer that's liable at any minute to recognise them as the same
mules he bought from me not two weeks ago. yes. hit's easy enough for them to talk that
sets here getting rich and takes no risk."

said.

satisfied with making just five or six hundred dollars at a time, why don't you requisition for
more mules at a time? why don't you write out a letter and have general smith turn over
his commissary train to you, with about four wagonloads of new shoes in hit? or, better
than that, pick out the day when the pay officer is coming around and draw for the whole
pay wagon; then we wouldn't even have to bother about finding somebody to buy hit."

the money was in new bills. granny folded them carefully and put them into the
can, but she didn't put the can back inside her dress right away (and she never put it back
under the loose board beneath her bed while ab was about the place). she sat there
looking at the fire, with the can in her hands and the string which suspended it looping
down from around her neck. she didn't look any thinner or any older. she didn't look sick
either.


hundred of them that you refuse--"

"refuse is right," ab said; he began to holler now: "yes, sir! i reckon i ain't got much
sense, or i wouldn't be doing this a-tall. but i got better sense than to take them mules to a
yankee officer and tell him that them hip patches where you and that durn nigger burned
out the u. s. brand are trace galls. by godfrey, i--"



relief regiment at mottstown. ringo went down two days ago to see about it. so we may
need that new fence soon."

mules in it we just got shet of."

granny said. ab started to say something, but granny didn't give him time. "you go on
home and rest up," she said. "ringo will probably be back tomorrow, and then you'll have
a chance to see if they are the same mules. i may even have a chance to find out what
they say they paid you for them."

you got my respect. john sartoris, himself, can't tech you. he hells all over the country day
and night with a hundred armed men, and it's all he can do to keep them in crowbait to
ride on. and you set here in this cabin, without nothing but a handful of durn printed
letterheads, and you got to build a bigger pen to hold the stock you ain't got no market
yet to sell. how many head of mules have you sold back to the yankees?"

"that will do," granny said. "have you had some supper?"
"i--" ab said. then he quit hollering. he chewed again. "yessum," he said. "i done et."
"then you had better go home and get some rest," granny said. "there is a new

ab stopped chewing. "is, huh?" he said. "out of memphis, likely. likely got them nine

granny looked at him. "so you sold them further back than three days ago, then,"

ab stood in the door and looked at granny. "you're a good un," he said. "yessum.

"a hundred and five," granny said. "a hundred and five," ab said. "for how much

active cash money, in round numbers?" only he didn't wait for her to answer; he told her
himself: "for six thousand and seven hundred and twenty-two dollars and six-ty-five cents,
lessen the dollar and thirty-five cents i spent for whisky that time the snake bit one of the
mules." it sounded round when he said it, like big sawn-oak wheels running in wet sand.
"you started out a year ago with two. you got forty-odd in the pen and twice that many
out on receipt. and i reckon you have sold about fifty-odd more back to the yankees a
hundred and five times, for a grand total of six thousand, seven hundred and twenty-two
dollars and sixty-five cents, and in a day or so you are aiming to requisition a few of them
back again, i understand."

he looked at me. "boy," he said, "when you grow up and start out for yourself, don't
you waste your time learning to be a lawyer or nothing. you just save your money and buy
you a handful of printed letterheads--it don't matter much what's on them, i reckon--and
you hand them to your grandmaw here and just ask her to give you the job of counting
the money when hit comes in."

he looked at granny again. "when kernel sartoris left here, he told me to look out
for you against general grant and them. what i wonder is, if somebody hadn't better tell
abe lincoln to look out for general grant against miz rosa millard. i bid you one and all
good night."

he went out. granny looked at the fire, the tin can in her hand. but it didn't have
any six thousand dollars in it. it didn't have a thousand dollars in it. ab snopes knew that,
only i don't suppose that it was possible for him to believe it. then she got up; she looked at
me, quiet. she didn't look sick; that wasn't it. "i reckon it's bedtime," she said. she went
beyond the quilt; it came back and hung straight down from the rafter, and i heard the
loose board when she put the can away under the floor, and then i heard the sound the
bed made when she would hold to the post to kneel down. it would make another sound
when she got up, but when it made that sound, i was already undressed and in my pallet.
the quilts were cold, but when the sound came i had been there long enough for them to
begin to get warm.

finished it early in the afternoon and i went back to the cabin. i was almost there when i
saw ringo on the mule turning in at the gates. granny had seen him, too, because when i
went inside the quilt, she was kneeling in the corner, taking the window shade from under
the loose floor board. while she was unrolling the shade on the bed we heard ringo
getting off the mule, hollering at it while he hitched it to louvinia's clothesline.

in. and then they sounded like two people playing a guessing game in code.

w. newberry. eight days out of memphis."
granny watched him while he came toward the bed. "how many?" she said.


"nineteen head," ringo said. "four with; fifteen without." granny just watched him;
she didn't have to speak at all for the next one. "twelve," ringo said. "out of that oxford
batch."

granny said.

then granny stood up and looked at the quilt until ringo pushed it aside and came

ab snopes came and helped me and joby with the new fence the next day, so we

"--th illinois infantry," ringo said. he came on toward the map on the bed. "col. g.

granny looked at the map; they both looked at it. "july the twenty-second,"

"yessum," ringo said. granny sat down on the saw chunk before the map. it was

"that was back in july," ringo said. "it's october now. they done forgot about hit.

"but that was four counties apart," granny said. "oxford and mottstown are only a

"we just sold that twelve in july," granny said. "that leaves only seven. and you say


the only window shade louvinia had; ringo had drawn it (father was right; he was smarter
than me; he had even learned to draw, who had declined even to try to learn to print his
name when loosh was teaching me; who had learned to draw immediately by merely
taking up the pen, who had no affinity for it and never denied he had not but who
learned to draw simply because somebody had to.) with granny showing him where to
draw in the towns. but it was granny who had done the writing, in her neat spidery hand
like she wrote in the cookbook with, written on the map by each town: colonel or major or
captain so-and-so, such-and-such regiment or troop. then, under that: 12 or 9 or 21
mules. and around four of them, town and writing and all, in purple pokeberry juice
instead of ink, a circle with a date in it, and in big neat letters complete.
they looked at the map, granny's head white and still where the light came

through the window on it, and ringo leaning over her. he had got taller during the
summer; he was taller than me now, maybe from the exercise of riding around the
country, listening out for fresh regiments with mules, and he had got to treating me like
granny did--like he and granny were the same age instead of him and me.

that four of them are branded."

'sides, look here"--he put his finger on the map. "we captived these here fourteen at
madison on the twelf of april, sont um to memphis and sold um, and had all fourteen back
and three more besides, here at caledonia on the third of may."

few miles apart."

"phut," ringo said, "these folks is too busy keeping us conquered to recognise no
little ten or twelve head of stock. 'sides, if they does recognise um in memphis, that's ab
snope's trouble, not ourn."


away. jest forty-eight hours to have um in the pen."

successful so far. too successful perhaps."

"nineteen head," ringo said. "four to keep and fifteen to sell back to um. that will
make a even two hundred and forty-eight head of confed'rit mules we done recovered
and collected interest on, let alone the money."


impatient either; he just stood there, thin and taller than me against the light from the
window, scratching himself. then he began to dig with his right-hand little fingernail
between his front teeth; he looked at his fingernail and spat something, and then he said,
"must been five minutes now." he turned his head a little toward me without moving. "get
the pen and ink," he said.

don't know how or where ringo got it. he just came back one night with about a hundred

"i don't know what to do," granny said. "i want to think about it."
"all right," ringo said. granny sat still beside the map. ringo didn't seem patient or

"mister snopes," granny said.
"all right," ringo said. he looked at the map. "nineteen head, and not two days

granny looked at the map. "i don't think we ought to risk it. we have been

they kept the paper under the same floor board with the map and the tin can. i

"what name you want this time?" he said.
"i'm worried about this," granny said. "we ought not to risk it."
"we was on 'f last time," ringo said. "it's 'h' now. think of a name in 'h.'"
"mrs. mary harris," granny said. "we done used mary before," ringo said. "how

sheets of it, stamped with the official letterhead: united states forces department of
tennessee. he had got the pen and the ink at the same time, too; he took them from me,
and now it was ringo sitting on the saw chunk and granny leaning over him. granny still
had the first letter--the order that colonel dick had given us in alabama last year--she kept
it in the can, too, and by now ringo had learned to copy it so that i don't believe that
colonel dick himself could have told the difference. all they had to do was to put in the
right regiment and whatever number of mules ringo had examined and approved, and
sign the right general's name to it. at first ringo had wanted to sign grant's name every
time, and when granny said that would not do anymore, lincoln's. at last granny found
out that ringo objected to having the yankees think that father's folks would have any
dealings with anybody under the general-in-chief. but at last he realised that granny was
right, that they would have to be careful about what general's name was on the letter, as
well as what mules they requisitioned. they were using general smith now; he and forrest
were righting every day up and down the road to memphis, and ringo always
remembered to put in rope.

name and the first line. then he stopped; he didn't lift the pen.




about plurella harris?"

"i'm worried about this time," granny said. "miz plurella harris," ringo said, writing.
"now we done used up 'p' too. 'member that, now. i reckon when we run out of letters,
maybe we can start in on numbers. we will have nine hundred and ninety-nine before we
have to worry, then." he finished the order and signed "general smith" to it; it looked
exactly like the man who had signed the one colonel dick gave us was named general
smith, except for the number of mules. then granny turned and looked at me. "tell mr.
snopes to be ready at sunup," she said. we went in the wagon, with ab snopes and his
two men following on two of the mules. we went just fast enough so that we would reach
the bivouac at supper-time, because granny and ringo had found out that that was the
best time--that the stock would all be handy, and the men would be too hungry or sleepy
or something to think very quick in case they happened to think, and we would just have
time to get the mules and get out of sight before dark came. then, if they should decide
to chase us, by the time they found us in the dark, there wouldn't be anything but the
wagon with me and granny in it to capture.

in the woods beyond the bivouac, and granny and ringo and i drove up to colonel
newberry's tent at exactly the right time, and granny passed the sentry and went into the
tent, walking thin and straight, with the shawl over her shoulders and mrs. compson's hat
on her head and the parasol in one hand and hers and ringo's general smith order in the
other, and ringo and i sat in the wagon and looked at the cook fires about the grove and
smelled the coffee and the meat. it was always the same. granny would disappear into
the tent or the house, and then, in about a minute, somebody would holler inside the tent
or the house, and then the sentry at the door would holler, and then a sergeant, or even
sometimes an officer, only it would be a lieutenant, would hurry into the tent or the house,
and then ringo and i would hear somebody cursing, and then they would all come out,

he wrote the date and the town, the headquarters; he wrote in colonel newberry's

so we did; only this time it was a good thing we did. we left ab snopes and his men

granny walking straight and stiff and not looking much bigger than cousin denny at
hawkhurst, and three or four mad yankee officers behind her, and getting madder all the
time. then they would bring up the mules, tied together. granny and ringo could guess to
the second now; it would be just enough light left to tell that they were mules, and granny
would get into the wagon and ringo would hang his legs over the tail gate, holding the
lead rope, and we would go on, not fast, so that when we came back to where ab
snopes and his men waited in the woods you could not even tell that they were mules.
then ringo would get onto the lead mule and they would turn off into the woods and
granny and i would go on home.

own team when we heard them coming, the galloping hoofs. they came up fast and
mad; granny jerked up quick and straight, holding mrs. compson's parasol.


and mad men shouting "halt! halt! if they try to escape, shoot the team!" with me and
granny sitting in the wagon and men jerking the team back and the team jerking and
clashing in the traces, and some of them hollering "where are the mules? the mules are
gone!" and the officer cursing and shouting "of course they are gone!" and cursing granny
and the darkness and the men and mules. then somebody struck a light and we saw the
officer sitting his horse beside the wagon while one of the soldiers lit one light-wood splinter
from another.



forged order! we have got you this time! we knew you'd turn up again. orders went out to
the whole department to watch for you a month ago! that damn newberry had his copy
in his pocket while you were talking to him." he cursed colonel newberry now. "they ought
to let you go free and court-martial him! where's the nigger boy and the mules, mrs.
plurella harris?"

"i don't know what you are talking about," granny said. "i have no mules except this
team i am driving. and my name is rosa millard. i am on my way home beyond jefferson."

the officer began to laugh; he sat on the horse, laughing. "so that's your real name,
hey? well, well, well. so you have begun to tell the truth at last. come now, tell me where
those mules are, and tell me where the others you have stolen from us are hid."

then ringo hollered. he and ab snopes and the mules had turned off into the
woods on the right side of the road, but when he hollered now he was on the left side.
"heyo the road!" he hollered. "one busted loose! head um off the road!"

whirled his horse, already spurring him, hollering, "two men stay here." maybe they all
thought he meant two others, because there was just a big noise of bushes and trees like a
cyclone was going through them, and then granny and i were sitting in the wagon like
before we had even heard the hoofs.


"where are the mules?" the officer shouted.
"what mules?" granny said.
"don't lie to me!" the officer shouted. "the mules you just left camp with on that

and that was all of that. the soldier dropped the light-wood splinter and the officer

that's what we did this time; only this time it happened. we couldn't even see our

"damn that ringo!" she said. "i had my doubts about this time all the while."
then they were all around us, like the dark itself had fallen down on us, full of horses

"come on," granny said. she was already getting out of the wagon.

"are we going to leave the team and wagon?" i said. "yes," granny said. "i

"but we have nineteen new ones," i said. "that makes two hundred and forty-eight."

"did i holler loud enough?" he said
"yes," granny said. then she said, "well?"
"all right," ringo said. "i told ab snopes to hide out with them in hickahala bottom


misdoubted this all the time." we could not see at all in the woods; we felt our way, and
me helping granny along and her arm didn't feel any bigger than a pencil almost, but it
wasn't trembling. "this is far enough," she said. i found a log and we sat down. beyond the
road we could hear them thrashing around, shouting and cursing. it sounded far away
now. "and the team too," granny said.

it seemed like a long time, sitting there on the log in the dark. after a while they came
back, we could hear the officer cursing and the horses crashing and thumping back into
the road. and then he found the wagon was empty and he cursed sure enough--granny
and me, and the two men he had told to stay there. he was still cursing while they turned
the wagon around. then they went away. after a while we couldn't hear them. granny
got up and we felt our way back to the road, and we went on, too, toward home. after a
while i persuaded her to stop and rest, and while we were sitting beside the road we
heard the buggy coming. we stood up, and ringo saw us and stopped the buggy.



until tomorrow night. all 'cep' these two."



buggy?"

paper."

but it wasn't midnight yet--i could tell by the stars--we would be home by midnight almost.
we went on. "i reckon you went and told um who we is now," ringo said.


and forty-eight head while the business lasted."



2

it was after midnight when we reached home; it was already sunday and when we
reached the church that morning there was the biggest crowd waiting there had ever
been, though ab snopes would not get back with the new mules until tomorrow. so i
believed that somehow they had heard about last night and they knew too, like ringo,
that this was the end and that now the books would have to be balanced and closed. we
were late, because granny made ringo get up at sunup and take the buggy back where

"yes," granny said.
"well, i reckon that completes that," ringo said. "anyway, we handled two hundred

"mister snopes," granny said.
"all right," ringo said. "get in and le's go home."
granny didn't move; i knew why, even before she spoke. "where did you get this

"i borrowed hit," ringo said. " 'twarn't no yankees handy, so i never needed no

we got in. the buggy went on. it seemed to me like it had already been all night,

"two hundred and forty-six," granny said. "we have lost the team."

we sat down in our pew, like before there was a war, only for father--granny still

he had got it. so when we reached the church they were already inside, waiting. brother
fortinbride met us at the door, and they all turned in the pews and watched granny--the
old men and the women and the children and the maybe a dozen niggers that didn't
have any white people now--they looked at her exactly like father's fox hounds would look
at him when he would go into the dog run, while we went up the aisle to our pew. ringo
had the book; he went up to the gallery, i looked back and saw him leaning his arms on
the book on the balustrade.

and straight in her sunday calico dress and the shawl and the hat mrs. compson had
loaned her a year ago; straight and quiet, with her hands holding her prayer book in her
lap like always, though there hadn't been an episcopal service in the church in almost
three years now. brother fortinbride was a methodist, and i don't know what the people
were. last summer when we got back with the first batch of mules from alabama, granny
sent for them, sent out word back into the hills where they lived in dirt-floored cabins, on
the little poor farms without slaves. it took three or four times to get them to come in, but at
last they all came--men and women and children and the dozen niggers that had got free
by accident and didn't know what to do about it. i reckon this was the first church with a
slave gallery some of them had ever seen, with ringo and the other twelve sitting up there
in the high shadows where there was room enough for two hundred; and i could
remember back when father would be in the pew with us and the grove outside would be
full of carriages from the other plantations, and doctor worsham in his stole beneath the
altar, and for each white person in the auditorium there would be ten niggers in the
gallery. and i reckon that on that first sunday when granny knelt down in public, it was the
first time they had ever seen anyone kneel in a church. brother fortinbride wasn't a minister
either. he was a private in father's regiment, and he got hurt bad in the first battle the
regiment was in; they thought that he was dead, but he said that jesus came to him and
told him to rise up and live, and father sent him back home to die, only he didn't die. but
they said that he didn't have any stomach left at all, and everybody thought that the food
we had to eat in 1862 and '63 would finish killing him, even if he had eaten it with women
to cook it instead of gathering weeds from ditch banks and cooking them himself. but it
didn't kill him, and so maybe it was jesus, after all, like he said. and so, when we came
back with the first batch of mules and the silver and the food, and granny sent word out
for all that needed, it was like brother fortinbride sprang right up out of the ground with the
names and histories of all the hill folks at his tongue's end, like maybe what he claimed was
true--that the lord had both him and granny in mind when he created the other. so he
would stand there where doctor worsham used to stand, and talk quiet for a little while
about god, with his hair showing where he cut it himself and the bones looking like they
were coming right out through his face, in a frock coat that had turned green a long time
ago and with patches on it that he had sewed on himself--one of them was green
horsehide and the other was a piece of tent canvas with the u. s. a. stencil still showing a
little on it. he never talked long; there wasn't much anybody could say about confederate
armies now. i reckon there is a time when even preachers quit believing that god is going
to change his plan and give victory where there is nothing left to hang victory on. he just
said how victory without god is mockery and delusion, but that defeat with god is not
defeat. then he quit talking, and he stood there with the old men and the women and
children and the eleven or twelve niggers lost in freedom, in clothes made out of cotton
bagging and floursacks, still watching granny--only now it was not like the hounds used to
look at father, but like they would watch the food in loosh's hands when he would go in to
feed them--and then he said:

she knelt down in the pew; she looked littler than cousin denny; it was only mrs.

"brethren and sisters, sister millard wishes to bear public witness."
granny stood up. she would not go to the altar; she just stood there in our pew with



her face straight ahead, in the shawl and mrs. compson's hat and the dress that louvinia
washed and ironed every saturday, holding the prayer book. it used to have her name on
it in gold letters, but now the only way you could read them was to run your finger over
them; she said quiet, too--quiet as brother fortinbride--"i have sinned. i want you all to pray
for me."

compson's hat above the pew back they had to look at now. i don't know if she prayed
herself or not. and brother fortinbride didn't pray either--not aloud anyway. ringo and i
were just past fifteen then, but i could imagine what doctor worsham would have thought
up to say--about all soldiers did not carry arms, and about they also serve, and how one
child saved from hunger and cold is better in heaven's sight than a thousand slain
enemies. but brother fortinbride didn't say it. i reckon he thought of that; he always had
plenty of words when he wanted to. it was like he said to himself, "words are fine in
peacetime, when everybody is comfortable and easy. but now i think that we can be
excused." he just stood there where doctor worsham used to stand and where the bishop
would stand, too, with his ring looking big as a pistol target. then granny rose up; i didn't
have time to help her; she stood up, and then the long sound went through the church, a
sound kind of like a sigh that ringo said was the sound of the cotton bagging and the
floursacking when they breathed again, and granny turned and looked back toward the
gallery; only ringo was already moving.
"bring the book," she said.


it was a big blank account book; it weighed almost fifteen pounds. they opened it
on the reading desk, granny and ringo side by side, while granny drew the tin can out of
her dress and spread the money on the book. but nobody moved until she began to call
out the names. then they came up one at a time, while ringo read the names off the
book, and the date, and the amount they had received before. each time granny would
make them tell what they intended to do with the money, and now she would make them
tell her how they had spent it, and she would look at the book to see whether they had
lied or not. and the ones that she had loaned the brand-blotted mules that ab snopes
was afraid to try to sell would have to tell her how the mule was getting along and how
much work it had done, and now and then she would take the mule away from one man
or woman and give it to another, tearing up the old receipt and making the man or the
woman sign the new one, telling them on what day to go and get the mule.

together, and granny stopped putting the rest of the money back into the can and she
and brother fortinbride did what they did each time. "i'm making out fine with the mule,"
he said. "i don't need any money."

feed a bird the longest day you live. you take this money."
"no," brother fortinbride said. "i'm making out fine."


we walked back home, ringo carrying the book. "you done receipted out four
mules you ain't hardly laid eyes on yet," he said. "what you gonter do about that?"

so it was afternoon when ringo closed the book and got the new receipts

"fiddlesticks," granny said. "you'll never grow enough food out of the ground to

"they will be here tomorrow morning, i reckon," granny said. they were; ab snopes

"yes, ma'am," he said, "i don't never want to be rich; i just want to be lucky. do you

so it was just a lieutenant. he looked about forty, and kind of mad and gleeful,


came in while we were eating breakfast; he leaned in the door with his eyes a little red
from lack of sleep and looked at granny.

know what you done?" only nobody asked him what, so he told us anyway: "hit was
taking place all day yestiddy; i reckon by now there ain't a yankee regiment left in
mississippi. you might say that this here war has turned around at last and went back
north. yes, sir. that regiment you requisitioned on sattidy never even stayed long enough
to warm the ground. you managed to requisition the last batch of yankee livestock at the
last possible moment hit could have been done by living man. you made just one mistake:
you drawed them last nineteen mules just too late to have anybody to sell them back to."


3

it was a bright warm day; we saw the guns and the bits shining a long way down the
road. but this time ringo didn't even move. he just quit drawing and looked up from the
paper and said, "so ab snopes was lying. gre't god, ain't we gonter never get shet of
them?" it was just a lieutenant; by this time ringo and i could tell the different officers' ranks
better than we could tell confederate ranks, because one day we counted up and the
only confederate officers we had ever seen were father and the captain that talked to us
with uncle buck mccaslin that day in jefferson before grant burned it. and this was to be
the last time we would see any uniforms at all except as the walking symbols of defeated
men's pride and indomitable unregret, but we didn't know that now.

both at the same time. ringo didn't recognise him because he had not been in the wagon
with us, but i did:--from the way he sat .the horse, or maybe from the way he looked mad
and happy both, like he had been mad for several days, thinking about how much he was
going to enjoy being mad when the right time came. and he recognised me, too; he
looked at me once and said "hah!" with his teeth showing, and pushed his horse up and
looked at ringo's picture. there were maybe a dozen cavalry behind him; we never
noticed especially. "hah!" he said again, then he said, "what's that?"

even more of them than i had. "look at it."

the lieutenant looked at me and said "hah!" again behind his teeth; every now and
then while he was talking to ringo he would do that. he looked at ringo's picture. then he
looked up the grove to where the chimneys rose out of the pile of rubble and ashes. grass
and weeds had come up out of the ashes now, and unless you knew better, all you saw
was the four chimneys. some of the goldenrod was still in bloom. "oh," the officer said. "i
see. you're drawing it like it used to be."

"co-rect," ringo said. "what i wanter draw hit like hit is now? i can walk down here
ten times a day and look at hit like hit is now. i can even ride in that gate on a horse and
do that."

still enjoying waiting a little longer to get good and mad. he just kind of grunted. "when

the lieutenant didn't say "hah!" this time. he didn't do anything yet; i reckon he was

"a house," ringo said. ringo had never even looked at him good yet; he had seen

"i don't know," i said.
"well, i reckon i know," ringo said. but we didn't talk any more. we ran on up the

you get done here, you can move into town and keep busy all winter, can't you?" he said.
then he sat back in the saddle. he didn't say "hah!" now either; it was his eyes that said it,
looking at me. they were a kind of thin milk color, like the chine knucklebone in a ham. "all
right," he said. "who lives up there now? what's her name today, hey?"

ringo was watching him now, though i don't think he suspected yet who he was.
"don't nobody," he said. "the roof leaks." one of the men made a kind of sound; maybe it
was laughing. the lieutenant started to whirl around, and then he started not to; then he
sat there glaring down at ringo with his mouth beginning to open. "oh," ringo said, "you
mean way back yonder, in the quarters. i thought you was still worrying about them
chimneys."

this time the soldier did laugh, and this time the lieutenant did whirl around, cursing
at the soldier; i would have known him now even if i hadn't before. he cursed at them all
now, sitting there with his face swelling up. "blank-blank-blank!" he shouted. "get to hell on
out of here! he said that pen is down there in the creek bottom beyond the pasture. if you
meet man, woman or child and they so much as smile at you, shoot them! get!" the
soldiers went on, galloping up the drive; we watched them scatter out across the pasture.
the lieutenant looked at me and ringo; he said "hah!" again, glaring at us. "you boys
come with me. jump!"

'he' said the pen was in the creek bottom," ringo said. "who you reckon 'he' is?"


drive. the lieutenant had reached the cabin now, and granny came out the door. i
reckon she had seen him, too, because she already had her sunbonnet on. they looked at
us once, then granny went on, too, walking straight, not fast, down the path toward the
lot, with the lieutenant behind her on the horse. we could see his shoulders and his head,
and now and then his hand and arm, but we couldn't hear what he was saying. "i reckon
this does complete hit," ringo said.

standing at the fence that joby and i had just finished--granny straight and still, with her
sunbonnet on and the shawl drawn tight over her shoulders where she had her arms
folded in it so that she looked littler than anybody i could remember, like during the four
years she hadn't got any older or weaker, but just littler and littler and straighter and
straighter and more and more indomitable; and the lieutenant beside her with one hand
on his hip and waving a whole handful of letters at granny's face with the other.

"look like he got all we ever wrote there," ringo said. the soldiers' horses were all
tied along the fence; they were inside the pen now, and they and joby and ab snopes
had the forty-odd old mules and the nineteen new ones hemmed into the corner. the
mules were still trying to break out, only it didn't look like that. it looked like every one of
them was trying to keep the big burned smear where granny and ringo had blotted the
u. s. brand turned so that the lieutenant would have to look at it.

"you have been using cast-off band-saw bands for traces, hey? i'd rather engage forrest's
whole brigade every morning for six months than spend that same length of time trying to
protect united states property from defenseless southern women and niggers and
children. defenseless!" he shouted. "defenseless! god help the north if davis and lee had

"and i guess you will call those scars left-handed trace galls!" the lieutenant said.

he didn't wait for us; he galloped, too, up the drive. we ran; ringo looked at me. "

but we could hear him before we reached the new fence. then we could see them

in the pen the mules huddled and surged, with ab snopes waving his arms at them

"listen," he said. "we are on evacuation orders now. likely i am the last federal

"i don't know," granny said.
"you don't know," the lieutenant said. "you mean, you--" he talked quiet now. "i see.

ever thought of the idea of forming a brigade of grandmothers and nigger orphans, and
invading us with it!" he hollered, shaking the letters at granny.

now and then. then the lieutenant quit shouting; he even quit shaking the letters at
granny.

soldier you will have to look at. and i'm not going to harm you--orders to that effect too. all
i'm going to do is take back this stolen property. and now i want you to tell me, as enemy
to enemy, or even man to man, if you like. i know from these forged orders how many
head of stock you have taken from us, and i know from the records how many times you
have sold a few of them back to us; i even know what we paid you. but how many of
them did you actually sell back to us more than one time?"
"i don't know," granny said.


"you don't know," the lieutenant said. he didn't start to shout now, he just stood
there, breathing slow and hard, looking at granny; he talked now with a kind of furious
patience, as if she were an idiot or an indian: "listen. i know you don't have to tell me, and
you know i can't make you. i ask it only out of pure respect. respect? envy. won't you tell
me?"


you really don't know. you were too busy running the reaper to count the--" we didn't
move. granny wasn't even looking at him; it was ringo and me that watched him fold the
letters that granny and ringo had written and put them carefully into his pocket. he still
talked quiet, like he was tired: "all right, boys. rope them together and haze them out of
there."
"the gate is a quarter of a mile from here," a soldier said.


"throw down some fence," the lieutenant said. they began to throw down the
fence that joby and i had worked two months on. the lieutenant took a pad from his
pocket, and he went to the fence and laid the pad on the rail and took out a pencil. then
he looked back at granny; he still talked quiet: "i believe you said the name now is rosa
millard?" "yes," granny said.

he still talked quiet, like when somebody is sick in a room. "we are under orders to pay for
all property damaged in the process of evacuation," he said. "this is a voucher on the
quartermaster at memphis for ten dollars. for the fence." he didn't give the paper to her at
once; he just stood there, looking at her. "confound it, i don't mean promise. if i just knew
what you believed in, held--"

he cursed again, not loud and not at anybody or anything. "listen. i don't say
promise; i never mentioned the word. but i have a family; i am a poor man; i have no
grandmother. and if in about four months the auditor should find a warrant in the records
for a thousand dollars to mrs. rosa millard, i would have to make it good. do you see?"

"yes," granny said. "you need not worry." then they were gone. granny and ringo
and joby and i stood there and watched them drive the mules up across the pasture and
out of sight. we had forgot about ab snopes until he said, "well, hit looks like . . . that's all
they are to hit. but you still got that ere hundred-odd that are out on receipt, provided

the lieutenant wrote on the pad and tore the sheet out and came back to granny.

them hill folks don't take a example from them yankees. i reckon you can still be grateful
for that much anyway. so  i bid you, one and all, good day and get on home and rest a
spell. if i can help you again, just send for me." he went on too.
after a while granny said:


"joby, put those rails back up." i reckon ringo and i were both waiting for her to tell
us to help joby, but she didn't. she just said "come," and turned and went on, not toward
the cabin but across the pasture toward the road. we didn't know where we were going
until we reached the church. she went straight up the aisle to the chancel and stood
there until we came up. "kneel down," she said.

we knelt in the empty church. she was small between us, little; she talked quiet, not
loud, not fast and not slow; her voice sounded quiet and still, but strong and clear: "i have
sinned. i have stolen, and i have borne false witness against my neighbor, though that
neighbor was an enemy of my country. and more than that, i have caused these children
to sin. i hereby take their sins upon my conscience." it was one of those bright soft days. it
was cool in the church; the floor was cold to my knees. there was a hickory branch just
outside the window, turning yellow; when the sun touched it, the leaves looked like gold.
"but i did not sin for gain or for greed," granny said. "i did not sin for revenge. i defy you or
anyone to say i did. i sinned first for justice. and after that first time, i sinned for more than
justice; i sinned for the sake of food and clothes for your own creatures who could not help
themselves--for children who had given their fathers, for wives who had given their
husbands, for old people who had given their sons to a holy cause, even though you have
seen fit to make it a lost cause. what i gained, i shared with them. it is true that i kept some
of it back, but i am the best judge of that because i, too, have dependents who may be
orphans, too, at this moment, for all i know. and if this be sin in your sight, i take this on my
conscience too. amen."

it was the finest october that i could remember. or maybe it was because you are not
conscious of weather until you are fifteen. we walked slow back home, though granny
said she wasn't tired. "i just wish i knew how they found out about that pen," she said.

. "don't you know?" ringo said. granny looked at him. "ab snopes told them."

this time she didn't even say, "mister snopes." she just stopped dead still and looked
at ringo. "ab snopes?"

mules to somebody?" ringo said.

"ab snopes," granny said. "well." then she walked on; we walked on. "ab snopes,"
she said. "i reckon he beat me, after all. but it can't be helped now. and anyway, we did
pretty well, taken by and large."

granny didn't even stop.
"go on home and get the soap," she said.


he went on. we could watch him cross the pasture and go into the cabin, and
then come out and go down the hill toward the spring. we were close now; when i left
granny and went down to the spring, he was just rinsing his mouth, the can of soap in one
hand and the gourd dipper in the other. he spit and rinsed his mouth and spit again; there

she rose up. she got up easy, like she had no weight to herself. it was warm outside;

"do you reckon he was going to be satisfied until he had sold them last nineteen

"we done damn well," ringo said. he caught himself, but it was already too late.

ringo and i had just got back from jefferson with the letter, and ab snopes was in

was a long smear of suds up his cheek; a light froth of colored bubbles flicking away while i
watched them, without any sound at all. "i still says we done damn well," he said.


4

we tried to keep her from doing it--we both tried. ringo had told her about ab snopes,
and after that we both knew it. it was like all three of us should have known it all the time.
only i don't believe now that he meant to happen what did happen. but i believe that if
he had known what was going to happen, he would still have egged her on to do it. and
ringo and i tried--we tried--but granny just sat there before the fire--it was cold in the
cabin now--with her arms folded in the shawl and with that look on her face when she had
quit either arguing or listening to you at all, saying just this one time more and that even a
rogue will be honest for enough pay. it was christmas; we had just heard from aunt louisa
at hawkhurst and found out where drusilla was; she had been missing from home for
almost a year now, and at last aunt louisa found out that she was with father away in
carolina, like she had told me, riding with the troop like she was a man.

the cabin, telling granny about it, and granny listening and believing him because she still
believed that what side of a war a man fought on made him what he is. and she knew
better with her own ears; she must have known; everybody knew about them and were
either mad if they were men or terrified if they were women. there was one negro in the
county that everybody knew that they had murdered and burned him up in his cabin.
they called themselves grumby's independents--about fifty or sixty of them that wore no
uniform and came from nobody knew where as soon as the last yankee regiment was out
of the country, raiding smokehouses and stables, and houses where they were sure there
were no men, tearing up beds and floors and walls, frightening white women and torturing
negroes to find where money or silver was hidden.

tattered raiding commission actually signed by general forrest; though you couldn't tell if
the original name was grumby or not. but it got them off, because it was just some old
men that captured them; and now women who had lived alone for three years
surrounded by invading armies were afraid to stay in the houses at night, and the negroes
who had lost their white people lived hidden in caves back in the hills like animals.

that's who ab snopes was talking about, with his hat on the floor and his hands
flapping and his hair bent up across the back of his head where he had slept on it. the
band had a thoroughbred stallion and three mares--how ab snopes knew it he didn't say--
that they had stolen; and how he knew they were stolen, he didn't say. but all granny had
to do was to write out one of the orders and sign forrest's name to it; he, ab, would
guarantee to get two thousand dollars for the horses. he swore to that, and granny, sitting
there with her arms rolled into the shawl and that expression on her face, and ab snopes'
shadow leaping and jerking up the wall while he waved his arms and talked about that
was all she had to do; to look at what she had made out of the yankees, enemies, and
that these were southern men and, therefore, there would not even be any risk to this,
because southern men would not harm a woman, even if the letter failed to work.

they were caught once, and the one that said he was grumby produced a

oh, we had no chance against him. we begged her to let us ask advice from

but we didn't quit trying; all that day--ab snopes had located them; it was an

oh, he did it well. i can see now that ringo and i had no chance against him--


about how the business with the yankees had stopped without warning, before she had
made what she had counted on, and how she had given most of that away under the
belief that she would be able to replace that and more, but as it was now, she had made
independent and secure almost everyone in the county save herself and her own blood;
that soon father would return home to his ruined plantation and most of his slaves
vanished; and how it would be if, when he came home and looked about at his desolate
future, she could take fifteen hundred dollars in cash out of her pocket and say, "here.
start over with this"--fifteen hundred dollars more than she had hoped to have. he would
take one of the mares for his commission and he would guarantee her fifteen hundred
dollars for the other three.

uncle buck mccaslin, anyone, any man. but she just sat there with that expression on her
face, saying that the horses did not belong to him, that they had been stolen, and that all
she had to do was to frighten them with the order, and even ringo and i knowing at
fifteen that grumby, or whoever he was, was a coward and that you might frighten a
brave man, but that nobody dared frighten a coward; and granny, sitting there without
moving at all and saying, "but the horses do not belong to them because they are stolen
property," and we said, "then no more will they belong to us," and granny said, "but they
do not belong to them."

abandoned cotton compress on tallahatchie river, sixty miles away--while we rode in the
rain in the wagon ab snopes got for us to use, we tried. but granny just sat there on the
seat between us, with the order signed by ringo for general forrest in the tin can under
her dress and her feet on some hot bricks in a crokersack that we would stop every ten
miles and build a fire in the ram and heat again, until we came to the crossroads, where
ab snopes told us to leave the wagon and walk. and then she would not let me and
ringo go with her. "you and ringo look like men," she said. "they won't hurt a woman." it
had rained all day; it had fallen gray and steady and slow and cold on us all day long,
and now it was like twilight had thickened it without being able to make it any grayer or
colder. the crossroad was not a road any more; it was no more than a faint gash turning
off at right angles into the bottom, so that it looked like a cave. we could see the hoof
marks in it.

"then you shan't go," i said. "i'm stronger than you are; i'll hold you." i held her; her
arm felt little and light and dry as a stick. but it wasn't that; her size and appearance had
no more to do with it than it had in her dealings with the yankees; she just turned and
looked at me, and then i began to cry. i would be sixteen years old before another year
was out, yet i sat there in the wagon, crying. i didn't even know when she freed her arm.
and then she was out of the wagon, standing there looking at me in the gray rain and the
gray darkening light.

"it's for all of us," she said. "for john and you and ringo and joby and louvinia. so
we will have something when john comes back home. you never cried when you knew
he was going into a battle, did you? and now i am taking no risk; i am a woman. even
yankees do not harm old women. you and ringo stay here until i call you."
we tried. i keep on saying that because i know now that i didn't. i could have held

her, turned the wagon, driven away, holding her in it. i was just fifteen, and for most of my
life her face had been the first thing i saw in the morning and the last thing i saw at night,
but i could have stopped her, and i didn't. i sat there in the wagon in the cold rain and let

we just sat there in the wagon in that cold dissolving december twilight until at last i

her walk on into the wet twilight and never come out of it again. how many of them there
were in the cold compress, i don't know, and when and why they took fright and left, i
don't know.

couldn't bear it any longer. then ringo and i were both running, trying to run, in the ankle-
deep mud of that old road pocked with the prints of ingoing hoofs, but of no wheel,
knowing that we had waited too long either to help her or to share in her defeat. because
there was no sound nor sign of life at all; just the huge rotting building with the gray
afternoon dying wetly upon it, and then at the end of the hall a faint crack of light
beneath a door.

i don't remember touching the door at all, because the room was a floor raised
about two feet from the earth, so that i ran into the step and fell forward into and then
through the door, onto my hands and knees in the room, looking at granny. there was a
tallow dip still burning on a wooden box, but it was the powder i smelled, stronger even
than the tallow. i couldn't seem to breathe for the smell of the powder, looking at granny.
she had looked little alive, but now she looked like she had collapsed, like she had been
made out of a lot of little thin dry light sticks notched together and braced with cord, and
now the cord had broken and all the little sticks had collapsed in a quiet heap on the
floor, and somebody had spread a clean and faded calico dress over them.


vendee

they all came in again when we buried granny,

and the niggers--the twelve who used to come in when word would spread that ab
snopes was back from memphis, and the hundred more who had returned to the county
since, who had followed the yankees away and then returned, to find their families and
owners gone, to scatter into the hills and live in caves and hollow trees like animals i
suppose, not only with no one to depend on but with no one depending on them, caring
whether they returned or not or lived or died or not: and that i suppose is the sum, the
sharp serpent's fang, of bereavement and loss--all coming in from the hills in the rain. only
there were no yankees in jefferson now so they didn't have to walk in; i could look across
the grave and beyond the other headstones and monuments and see the dripping cedar
grove full of mules with long black smears on their hips where granny and ringo had
burned out the u. s. brand.

big preacher refugeeing from memphis or somewhere--and i found out how mrs.
compson and some of them had arranged for him to preach the funeral. but brother
fortinbride didn't let him. he didn't tell him not to; he just didn't say anything to him at all,
he just acted like a grown person coming in where the children are getting ready to play a
game and telling the children that the game is all right but that the grown folks need the
room and the furniture for a while. he came walking fast up from the grove where he had
hitched his mule with the others, with his gaunted face and his frock coat with the horse-
hide and the yankee-tent patches, into where the town people were standing around
under umbrellas with granny in the middle and the big refugeeing preacher with his book

brother fortinbride and all of them--the old men and the women and the children,

most of the jefferson people were there too, and there was another preacher--a

the town men would have moved. some of them did. uncle buck mccaslin was

already open and one of the compson niggers holding an umbrella over him and the rain
splashing slow and cold and gray on the umbrella and splashing slow on the yellow boards
where granny was and into the dark red dirt beside the red grave without splashing at all.
brother fortinbride just walked in and looked at the umbrellas and then at the hill people in
cotton bagging and split floursack clothes that didn't have umbrellas, and went to granny
and said, "come, you men."

the first man of them all, town and hill, to come forward. by christmas his rheumatism
would be so bad that he couldn't hardly lift his hand, but he was there now, with his
peeled hickory stick, shoving up through the hill men with crokersacks tied over their heads
and the town men with umbrellas getting out of his way; then ringo and i stood there and
watched granny going down into the earth with the quiet rain splashing on the yellow
boards until they quit looking like boards and began to look like water with thin sunlight
reflected in it, sinking away into the ground. then the wet red dirt began to flow into the
grave, with the shovels darting and flicking slow and steady and the hill men waiting to
take turns with the shovels because uncle buck would not let anyone spell him with his.

it didn't take long, and i reckon the refugeeing preacher would have tried again
even then, but brother fortinbride didn't give him a chance. brother fortinbride didn't even
put down his shovel; he stood there leaning on it like he was in the field, and he sounded
just like he used to in the church when ab snopes would be home from memphis again--
strong and quiet and not loud:

where she has gone. and i don't reckon that anybody that ever knew her would want to
insult her by telling her to rest anywhere in peace. and i reckon that god has already seen
to it that there are men, women and children, black, white, yellow or red, waiting for her,
to tend and worry over. and so you folks go home. some of you ain't come far, and you
came that distance in carriages with tops. but most of you didn't, and it's by the grace of
rosa millard that you didn't come on foot. i'm talking to you. you have wood to cut and
split, at least. and what do you reckon rosa millard would say about you all standing
around here, keeping old folks and children out here in the rain?"

came back, and some others did--i don't remember who--and then, when i thought they
had all gone, i looked around, and there was uncle buck. he came up to us with one
elbow jammed into his side and his beard drawn over to one side like it was another arm,
and his eyes red and mad like he hadn't slept much, and holding his stick like he was fixing
to hit somebody with it and he didn't much care who.
"what you boys going to do now?" he said.


the earth was loose and soft now, dark and red with rain, so that the rain didn't
splash on granny at all; it just dissolved slow and gray into the dark-red mound, so that
after a while the mound began to dissolve, too, without changing shape, like the soft
yellow color of the boards had dissolved and stained up through the earth, and mound
and boards and rain were all melting into one vague quiet reddish gray.


been at the old compress that night with granny. "need me or not," he hollered, "by

"i want to borrow a pistol," i said.
he began to holler then, but quiet. because he was older than us; it was like it had

"i don't reckon that rosa millard or anybody that ever knew her has to be told

mrs. compson asked me and ringo to come home and live with her until father

"i don't care," i said. "i just want a pistol. or a gun. ours got burned up with the

"all right!" he hollered. "me and the pistol, or you and this nigger horse thief and a

"ab snopes?" uncle buck hollered. "do you think it's ab snopes this boy is thinking

"him, grumby?" he hollered. "ab snopes? ab snopes? by godfrey, if he was

"wait," he said. "i got a idea." we turned from the road and came to a creek

"we got the bar'l of the musket yet," ringo said. "i reckon that's all we'll need for ab

godfrey, i'm going! you can't stop me! you mean to tell me you don't want me to go with
you?"

house."

fence rail. you ain't even got a poker at home, have you?"

snopes."

about? . . . hey?" he hollered, hollering at me now. "hey, boy?" it was changing all the
time, with the slow gray rain lancing slow and gray and cold into the red earth, yet it did
not change. it would be some time yet; it would be days and weeks and then months
before it would be smooth and quiet and level with the other earth. now uncle buck was
talking at ringo, and not hollering now. "catch my mule," he said. "i got the pistol in my
britches."

ab snopes lived back in the hills too. uncle buck knew where; it was midafternoon
by then and we were riding up a long red hill between pines when uncle buck stopped.
he and ringo had crokersacks tied over their heads. uncle buck's hand-worn stick stuck
out from under his sack with the rain shining on it like a long wax candle.

bottom; there was a faint path. it was dark under the trees and the rain didn't fall on us
now; it was like the bare trees themselves were dissolving slow and steady and cold into
the end of the december day. we rode in single file, in our wet clothes and in the wet
ammonia steam of the mules.

the pen was just like the one he and ringo and joby and i had built at home, only
smaller and better hidden; i reckon he had got the idea from ours. we stopped at the wet
rails; they were still new enough for the split sides to be still yellow with sap, and on the far
side of the pen there was something that looked like a yellow cloud in the twilight, until it
moved. and then we saw that it was a claybank stallion and three mares.


hadn't slept much lately. because the days were mixed up with the nights, all the while we
had been riding i would keep on thinking how ringo and i would catch it from granny
when we got back home, for going off in the rain without telling her. because for a minute
i sat there and looked at the horses and i believed that ab snopes was grumby. but uncle
buck begun to holler again.

grumby, if it was ab snopes that shot your grandmaw, i'd be ashamed to have it known.
i'd be ashamed to be caught catching him. no, sir. he ain't grumby; he's better than that."
he sat sideways on his mule with the sack over his head and his beard jerking and
wagging out of it while he talked. "he's the one that's going to show us where grumby is.
they just hid them horses here because they thought this would be the last place you boys
would think to look for them. and now ab snopes has went off with grumby to get some
more, since your grandmaw has gone out of business, as far as he is concerned. and
thank godfrey for that. it won't be a house or a cabin they will ever pass as long as ab

"i thought so," uncle buck said.
because i was mixed up. maybe it was because ringo and i were tired and we

and we didn't catch him that night. we went back to the road and went on, and

"we ain't going to need a pistol," uncle buck said. "he ain't even here, i tell you. you

"no," i said, "i want--"
he looked at me from under the crokersack. "you want what? you want to lay your

snopes is with them, that he won't leave an indelible signature, even if it ain't nothing to
capture but a chicken or a kitchen clock. by godfrey, the one thing we don't want is to
catch ab snopes."

then we came in sight of the house. i rode up to uncle buck. "give me the pistol," i said.

and that nigger stay back and let me do this. i'm going to find out which a way to start
hunting. get back, now."


two hands on the man that shot rosa millard, don't you?" he looked at me. i sat there on
the mule in the slow gray cold rain, in the dying daylight. maybe it was the cold. i didn't
feel cold, but i could feel my bones jerking and shaking. "and then what you going to do
with him?" uncle buck said. he was almost whispering now. "hey? hey?"
"yes," i said. "yes."

"yes. that's what. now you and ringo stay back. i'll do this."

it was just a cabin. i reckon there were a thousand of them just like it about our hills,

with the same canted plow lying under a tree and the same bedraggled chickens roosting
on the plow and the same gray twilight dissolving onto the gray shingles of the roof. then
we saw a faint crack of fire and a woman's face looking at us around the crack of the
door.

alabama on a visit."

him home?"


the rain."


waited at the old compress; it hadn't got darker exactly, the twilight had just thickened.

"well, well, well," uncle buck said. "they ain't in alabama, because she told us so.
and they ain't toward memphis, because there are still yankees there yet. so i reckon we
better try down toward grenada first. by godfrey, i'll bet this mule against that nigger's
pocket knife that we won't ride two days before we come on a mad woman hollering
down the road with a handful of chicken feathers in her hand. you come on here and
listen to me. by godfrey, we're going to do this thing but by godfrey we're going to do it
right."


2

"no," the woman said.
"sho, now," uncle buck said. "then i reckon we better get on back home and out of

"mr. snopes ain't here, if that's what you want," she said. "he's done gone to

"sho, now," uncle buck said. "to alabama. did he leave any word when to expect

"i reckon you had," the woman said. then the door closed.
we rode away. we rode back toward home. it was like it had been while we

we had two mules apiece, to swap onto at noon each day. we got the mules


so we didn't get ab snopes that day. we didn't get him for a lot of days, and nights too--
days in which we rode, the three of us, on relays of granny's and ringo's yankee mules
along the known roads and the unknown (and sometimes unmarked) trails and paths, in
the wet and the iron frost, and nights when we slept in the same wet and the same freeze
and (once) in the snow, beneath whatever shelter we found when night found us. they
had neither name nor number. they lasted from that december afternoon until late
february, until one night we realised that we had been hearing geese and ducks going
north for some time. at first ringo kept a pine stick and each night he would cut a notch in
it, with a big one for sunday and two long ones which meant christmas and new year's.
but one night when the stick had almost forty notches in it, we stopped in the rain to make
camp without any roof to get under and we had to use the stick to start a fire, because of
uncle buck's arm. and so, when we came to where we could get another pine stick, we
couldn't remember whether it had been five or six or ten days, and so ringo didn't start
another. because he said he would fix the stick up the day we got grumby and that it
wouldn't need but two notches on it--one for the day we got him and one for the day
granny died.

back from the hill people; we could have got a cavalry regiment if we had wanted it--of
old men and women and children, too--with cotton bagging and flour sacking for uniforms
and hoes and axes for arms, on the yankee mules that granny had loaned to them. but
uncle buck told them that we didn't need any help; that three was enough to catch
grumby.

and we came onto a house where the ashes were still smoking and a boy almost as big as
ringo and me still unconscious in the stable with even his shirt cut to pieces like they had
had a wire snapper on the whip, and a woman with a little thread of blood still running out
of her mouth and her voice sounding light and far away like a locust from across the
pasture, telling us how many there were and which way they would likely go saying, "kill
them. kill them."

it was a long way, but it wasn't far. you could have put a silver dollar down on the
geography page with the center of it at jefferson and we would have never ridden out
from under it. and we were closer behind them than we knew, because one night we had
ridden late without coming to a house or a shed to camp in, and so we stopped and
ringo said he would scout around a little, because all we had left to eat was the bone of
a ham; only it was more likely ringo was trying to dodge helping to get in the firewood. so
uncle buck and i were spreading down pine branches to sleep on when we heard a shot
and then a sound like a brick chimney falling onto a rotten shingle roof, and then the
horses, starting fast and dying away, and then i could hear ringo yelling. he had come
onto a house; he thought it was deserted, and then he said it looked too dark, too quiet.
so he climbed onto a shed against the back wall, and he said he saw the crack of light
and he was trying to pull the shutter open careful, but it came loose with a sound like a
shot, and he was looking into a room with a candle stuck into a bottle and either three or
thirteen men looking right at him; and how somebody hollered, "there they are!" and
another man jerked out a pistol and one of the others grabbed his arm as it went off, and
then the whole shed gave way under him, and he said how he lay there hollering and
trying to get untangled from the broken planks and heard them ride away.

they were not hard to follow. one day we had about twenty notches on the stick

"so he didn't shoot at you," uncle buck said. "hit warn't none of his fault if he never,"

"i have just ridden out from memphis," he said. "how far do you call it to alabama?"
uncle buck told him, not moving either, with the sparerib still raised in his left hand

"yes," the stranger said. "i'm looking for a man." and now i saw that he was looking

"sho, now," uncle buck said. "so you look to find him in alabama?"
"yes. i happen to know that he is now headed there. i almost caught him

"howdy, men," he said.
"howdy," uncle buck said. he was eating a sparerib; he sat now with the rib in his

"mind if i light and warm?" he said.
"light," uncle buck said.
he got off. but he didn't hitch the mare. he led her up and he sat down opposite us


ringo said. "but he didn't," uncle buck said. but he wouldn't let us go on that night. "we
won't lose any distance," he said. "they are flesh and blood, the same as we are. and we
ain't scared."

so we went on at daylight, following the hoofprints now. then we had three more
notches in the stick; that night ringo put the last notch in it that he was going to, but we
didn't know it. we were sitting in front of a cotton pen where we were going to sleep,
eating a shote that ringo had found, when we heard the horse. then the man begun to
holler, "hello! hello!" and then we watch him ride up on a good short-coupled sorrel mare,
with his neat little fine made boots, and his linen shirt without any collar, and a coat that
had been good, too, once, and a broad hat pulled down so that all we could see was his
eyes and nose between the hat and his black beard.


left hand and his right hand lying on his lap just inside his coat; he wore the pistol on a loop
of lace leather around his neck and stuck into his pants like a lady's watch. but the stranger
wasn't looking at him; he just looked at each of us once and then sat there on the mare,
with both his hands on the pommel in front of him.



with the reins in his hand. "give the stranger some meat, ringo," uncle buck said. but he
didn't take it. he didn't move. he just said that he had eaten, sitting there on the log with
his little feet side by side and his elbows out a little and his two hands on his knees as small
as a woman's hands and covered with a light mat of fine black hair right down to the
finger nails, and not looking at any of us now. i don't know what he was looking at now.


and the other hand lying just inside his coat. "you going to alabama, hey?"

at me from under his hat. "a man named grumby. you people in these parts may have
heard of him too."


his ink-colored beard. "then what i am doing does not have to be secret." he looked at
uncle buck now. "i live up in tennessee. grumby and his gang killed one of my niggers and
ran my horses off. i'm going to get the horses back. if i have to take grumby in the bargain,
that will suit me too."


yesterday; i did get one of his men, though the others escaped me. they passed you all
sometime last night, if you were in this neighborhood then. you would have heard them,
because when i last saw them, they were not wasting any time. i managed to persuade
the man i caught to tell me where they are to rondyvoo."

"yes," uncle buck said, "we have heard of him."
"ah," the stranger said. he smiled; for a second his teeth looked white as rice inside

"put some wood on the fire," uncle buck told ringo. "save your breath to snore with

ringo hushed, but he didn't move; he sat there staring back at the stranger, with his

the bullet went through the flesh of the inner side of the arm that had the

"alabama?" ringo said. "you mean they headed back toward alabama?"
"correct," the stranger said. he looked at ringo now. "did grumby steal your hog,



too, boy?" "hawg," ringo said. "hawg?"

tonight."

eyes looking a little red in the firelight.

"so you folks are out to catch a man, too, are you?" the stranger said.

"two is correct," ringo said. "i reckon ab snopes can pass for a man."

so then it was too late; we just sat there, with the stranger facing us across the fire
with the mare's reins in his little still hand, looking at the three of us from between his hat
and his beard. "ab snopes," he said. "i don't believe i am acquainted with ab snopes. but i
know grumby. and you want grumby too." he was looking at all of us now. "you want to
catch grumby. don't you think that's dangerous?"

"not exactly," uncle buck said. "you see, we done got a little alabama grumby
evidence ourselves. that something or somebody has give grumby a change of heart
about killing women and children." he and the stranger looked at each other. "maybe it's
the wrong season for women and children. or maybe it's public opinion, now that grumby
is what you might call a public character. folks hereabouts is got used to having their
menfolks killed and even shot from behind. but even the yankees never got them used to
the other. and evidently somebody has done reminded grumby of this. ain't that correct?"

they looked at each other; they didn't move. "but you are neither a woman nor a
child, old man," the stranger said. he stood up, easy; his eyes glinted in the firelight as he
turned and put the reins over the mare's head. "i reckon i'll get along," he said. we
watched him get into the saddle and sit there again, with his little black-haired hands lying
on the pommel, looking down at us--at me and ringo now. "so you want ab snopes," he
said. "take a stranger's advice and stick to him."

that her off back shoe is gone," when ringo hollered, "look out!" and then it seemed to me
that i saw the spurred mare jump before i saw the pistol flash; and then the mare was
galloping and uncle buck was lying on the ground cussing and yelling and dragging at his
pistol, and then all three of us were dragging and fighting over it, but the front sight was
caught in his suspenders, and the three of us fighting over it, and uncle buck panting and
cussing, and the sound of the galloping mare dying away.

rheumatism; that was why uncle buck cussed so bad; he said the rheumatism was bad
enough, and the bullet was bad enough, but to have them both at once was too much
for any man. and then, when ringo told him he ought to be thankful, that suppose the
bullet had hit his good arm and then he wouldn't even be able to feed himself, he
reached back and, still lying down, he caught up a stick of firewood and tried to hit ringo
with it. we cut his sleeve away and stopped the blood, and he made me cut a strip off his
shirt tail, and ringo handed him his stick and he sat there cussing us while we soaked the
strip in hot salt water, and he held the arm himself with his good hand, cussing a steady
streak, and made us run the strip back and forth through the hole the bullet had made. he
cussed then sure enough, looking a little like granny looked, like all old people look when

he turned the mare. i was watching him, then i was thinking "i wonder if he knows

and at first i thought that the black man was grumby, like i had thought that

"likely a bullet that's fixing to hit you halfway betwixt both arms stid of halfway

uncle buck rode fast; we could watch his stick rising and falling against the mule's

they have been hurt, with his beard jerking and his eyes snapping and his heels and the
stick jabbing into the ground like the stick had been with him so long that it felt the rag and
the salt too.

maybe ab snopes was. but uncle buck said not. it was the next morning; we hadn't slept
much because uncle buck wouldn't go to sleep; only we didn't know then that it was his
arm, because he wouldn't even let us talk about taking him back home. and now we tried
again, after we had finished breakfast, but he wouldn't listen, already on his mule with his
left arm tied across his chest and the pistol stuck between the arm and his chest, where he
could get to it quick, saying, "wait. wait," and his eyes hard and snapping with thinking. "it's
something i ain't quite got yet," he said. "something he was telling us last night without
aiming to have us know yet that he had told us. something that we are going to find out
today."

betwixt one," ringo said.

flank, not hard, just steady and fast, like a crippled man in a hurry that has used the stick so
long he don't even know it any more. because we didn't know that his arm was making
him sick yet; he hadn't given us time to realise it. so we hurried on, riding along beside a
slough, and then ringo saw the snake. it had been warm for a week, until last night. but
last night it made ice, and now we saw the moccasin where it had crawled out and was
trying to get back into the water when the cold got it, so that it lay with its body on the
land and its head fixed in the skim ice like it was set into a mirror, and uncle buck turned
sideways on his mule, hollering at us: "there it is, by godfrey! there's the sign! didn't i tell you
we would--"

galloping, except that some of the galloping came from uncle buck's mule, and he had
his pistol out now before he turned from the road and into the trees, with the stick jammed
under his hurt arm and his beard flying back over his shoulder. but we didn't find anything.
we saw the marks in the mud where the five horses had stood while the men that rode
them had watched the road, and we saw the sliding tracks where the horses had begun
to gallop, and i thinking quietly, "he still don't know that that shoe is gone." but that was all,
and uncle buck sitting on his mule with the pistol raised in his hand and his beard blown
back over his shoulder and the leather thong of the pistol hanging down his back like a
girl's pigtail, and his mouth open and his eyes blinking at me and ringo.

has done gone that way too."

beat the mule again when we saw what it was, what it meant.

sapling; we could see the marks in the mud where he had tried to roll back into the
underbrush until the rope stopped him. he had been watching us all the time, lying there
with his face in the shape of snarling and not making a sound after he found out he could
not roll out of sight. he was watching our mules' legs and feet under the bushes; he hadn't
thought to look any higher yet, and so he did not know that we could see him; he must
have thought that we had just spied him, because all of a sudden he began to jerk and
thrash on the ground, hollering, "help! help! help!"

"what in the tarnation hell!" he said. "well, let's go back to the road. whatever it was

we all heard it at once--the three or maybe four shots and then the sound of horses

so we had turned. uncle buck had put the pistol up and his stick had begun to

it was ab snopes. he was lying on his side, tied hand and foot, and hitched to a

we untied him and got him onto his feet, and he was still hollering, loud, with his

"so they caught you, hey?" uncle buck said. "a innocent and unsuspecting traveler.


face and his arms jerking, about how they had caught and robbed him, and they would
have killed him if they hadn't heard us coming and run away; only his eyes were not
hollering. they were watching us, going fast and quick from ringo to me to uncle buck,
and then at ringo and me again, and they were not hollering, like his eyes belonged to
one man and his gaped and yelling mouth belonged to another.

i reckon the name of them would never be grumby now, would it?"

it was like we might have stopped and built a fire and thawed out that moccasin--
just enough for it to find out where it was, but not enough for it to know what to do about
it. only i reckon it was a high compliment to set ab snopes up with a moccasin, even a
little one. i reckon it was bad for him. i reckon he realised that they had thrown him back
to us without mercy, and that if he tried to save himself from us at their expense, they
would come back and kill him. i reckon he decided that the worst thing that could
happen to him would be for us not to do anything to him at all. because he quit jerking his
arms; he even quit lying; for a minute his eyes and his mouth were telling the same thing.

"i made a mistake," he said. "i admit hit. i reckon everybody does. the question is,
what are you fellows going to do about hit?"

"yes," uncle buck said. "everybody makes mistakes. your trouble is, you make too
many. because mistakes are bad. look at rosa millard. she just made one, and look at
her. and you have made two."



going to kill me. you don't dast."

that snake den."

ringo and uncle buck; it was the two of them again now, the eyes and the voice. "why,
then i'm all right. bayard ain't got no hard feelings against me. he knows hit was a pure
accident; that we was doing hit for his sake and his paw and them niggers at home. why,
here hit's a whole year and it was me that holp and tended miss rosa when she never had
ara living soul but them chil--" now the voice began to tell the truth again; it was the eyes
and the voice that i was walking toward. he fell back, crouching, his hands flung up.


three on one!"
"stand still," uncle buck said. "ain't no three on you. i don't see nobody on you but

one of them children you was just mentioning." then we were both down in the mud; and
then i couldn't see him, and i couldn't seem to find him any more, not even with the
hollering; and then i was fighting three or four for a long time before uncle buck and ringo
held me, and then i could see him again, lying on the ground with his arms over his face.
"get up," uncle buck said.

ab snopes watched uncle buck. "what's them?"
"being born too soon and dying too late," uncle buck said.
he looked at all of us, fast; he didn't move, still talking to uncle buck. "you ain't

behind me, uncle buck said, "you, ringo! stay back."
he was walking backward now, with his hands flung up, hollering, "three on one!

"i don't even need to," uncle buck said. "it wasn't my grandmaw you sicked onto

he looked at me now, but his eyes were going again, back and forth across me at

"no," he said. "three of you can jump on me and knock me down again, but you

"wait," uncle buck said. ringo stopped. "you want another chance with one to

"lift him up," uncle buck said. "i'll hold bayard."
ringo lifted him; it was like lifting up a half-filled cotton sack. "stand up, mr. ab


got to pick me up first to do hit. i ain't got no rights and justice here, but you can't keep me
from protesting hit."


snopes," ringo said. but he would not stand, not even after ringo and uncle buck tied him
to the sapling and ringo had taken off his and uncle buck's and ab snopes' galluses and
knotted them together with the bridle reins from the mules. he just hung there in the rope,
not even flinching when the lash fell, saying, "that's hit. whup me. lay hit on me; you got
me three to one."

one? you can take your choice of the three of us."
"i got my rights," he said. "i'm helpless, but i can still protest hit. whup me."

i reckon he was right. i reckon if we had let him go clean, they would have circled

back and killed him themselves before dark. because--that was the night it began to rain
and we had to burn ringo's stick because uncle buck admitted now that his arm was
getting bad--we all ate supper together, and it was ab snopes that was the most anxious
about uncle buck, saying how it wasn't any hard feelings and that he could see himself
that he had made a mistake in trusting the folks he did, and that all he wanted to do now
was to go back home, because it was only the folks you had known all your life that you
could trust, and when you put faith in a stranger you deserved what you got when you
found that what you had been eating and sleeping with was no better than a passel of
rattlesnakes. but as soon as uncle buck tried to find out if it actually was crumby, he shut
up and denied that he had ever seen him.
they left us early the next morning. uncle buck was sick by then; we offered to ride

back home with him, or to let ringo ride back with him, and i would keep ab snopes with
me, but uncle buck wouldn't have it.

you would lose time burying him," uncle buck said. "you boys go on. it ain't going to be
long now. and catch them!" he begun to holler, with his face flushed and his eyes bright,
taking the pistol from around his neck and giving it to me, "catch them! catch them!"


3

so ringo and i went on. it rained all that day; now it began to rain all the time. we had
the two mules apiece; we went fast. it rained; sometimes we had no fire at all; that was
when we lost count of time, because one morning we came to a fire still burning and a
hog they had not even had time to butcher; and sometimes we would ride all night,
swapping mules when we had guessed that it had been two hours; and so, sometimes it
would be night when we slept and sometimes it would be daylight, and we knew that they
must have watched us from somewhere every day and that now that uncle buck was not
with us, they didn't even dare to stop and try to hide.

"grumby might capture him again and tie him to another sapling in the road, and

then one afternoon--the rain had stopped but the clouds had not broken and it

last woning not thret. turn back. the barer of this my promise and garntee. i have

this is signed by others beside g., one of whm in particular having less scruples re


was turning cold again--it was about dusk and we were galloping along an old road in the
river bottom; it was dim and narrow under the trees and we were galloping when my mule
shied and swerved and stopped, and i just did catch myself before i went over his head;
and then we saw the thing hanging over the middle of the road from a limb. it was an old
negro man, with a rim of white hair and with his bare toes pointing down and his head on
one side like he was thinking about something quiet. the note was pinned to him, but we
couldn't read it until we rode on into a clearing. it was a scrap of dirty paper with big
crude printed letters, like a child might have made them:

stood all i aim to stand children no children.

and something else written beneath it in a hand neat and small and prettier than
granny's, only you knew that a man had written it; and while i looked at the dirty paper i
could see him again, with his neat little feet and his little black-haired hands and his fine
soiled shirt and his fine muddy coat, across the fire from us that night.

children than he has. nethless undersgnd desires to give both you and g. one more
chance. take it, and some day become a man. refuse it, and cease even to be a child.

ringo and i looked at each other. there had been a house here once, but it was
gone now. beyond the clearing the road went on again into the thick trees in the gray
twilight. "maybe it will be tomorrow," ringo said.

daylight, following the dim road along the river bottom. this time it was ringo's mule that
shied; the man had stepped out of the bushes that quick, with his fine muddy boots and
coat and the pistol in his little black-haired hand, and only his eyes and his nose showing
between his hat and his beard.


them came out--the bearded man and another man walking abreast and leading two
saddled horses, and the third man walking just in front of them with his hands behind him--
a thick-built man with a reddish stubble and pale eyes, in a faded confederate uniform
coat and yankee boots, bare-headed, with a long smear of dried blood on his cheek and
one side of his coat caked with dried mud and that sleeve turned right into the pistol in the
bearded man's hand.


it without lowering his pistol or ceasing to watch grumby. then he sat there, too, looking
down at grumby, with his little hooked nose and his eyes alone showing between the hat
and the ink-colored beard. grumby began to move his head from side to side.


these boys there. but since you are so delicate about children, maybe they will be
delicate with you. but we'll give you a chance though." his other hand went inside his coat
too fast to watch; it had hardly disappeared before the other pistol flicked out and turned
once and fell at grumby's feet; again grumby moved, but the pistols stopped him. the

"steady," the bearded man said. "have you got him, bridger?"
"yes," the other man said. the bearded man backed to the other horse and got on

"boys," he said, "boys, you ain't going to do this to me."
"we're not going to do anything to you," the bearded man said. "i can't speak for

it was tomorrow; we slept that night in a haystack, but we were riding again by

"stay where you are," he said. "i will still be watching you."
we didn't move. we watched him step back into the bushes, then the three of

"we had a good thing in this country. we would have it yet, if it hadn't been for you.

bearded man sat on the horse, looking down at grumby, talking in that cold, still, vicious
voice that wasn't even mad:

and now we've got to pull out. got to leave it because you lost your nerve and killed an
old woman and then lost your nerve again and refused to cover the first mistake. scruples,"
he said. "scruples. so afraid of raising the country that there aint a man woman or child
black or white in it that aint on the watch for us. and all because you got scared and killed
an old woman you never saw before. not to get anything: not for one single confed.
banknote. but because you got scared of a piece of paper on which someone had
signed bedford forrest's name. and you with one exactly like it in your pocket now." he
didn't look at the other man, bridger, he just said, "all right. ease off. but watch him. he's too
tender hearted to turn your back on." they backed the horses away, side by side, the two
pistols trained on grumby's belly, until they reached the underbrush. "we're going to texas.
if you should leave this place, i would advise you to go at least that far also. but just
remember that texas is a wide place, and use that knowledge. ride!" he shouted.

he whirled the mare. bridger whirled too. as they did so, grumby leaped and
caught the pistol from the ground and ran forward, crouching and shouting into the
bushes, cursing. he shot three times toward the fading sound of the horses, then he whirled
back to face us. ringo and i were on the ground, too; i don't remember when we got
down nor why, but we were down, and i remember how i looked once at ringo's face
and then how i stood there with uncle buck's pistol feeling heavy as a firedog in my hand.
then i saw that he had quit whirling; that he was standing there with the pistol hanging
against his right leg and that he was looking at me; and then all of a sudden he was
smiling.

bowden fool me into emptying my pistol at him."

and i could hear my voice; it sounded faint and far away, like the woman's in
alabama that day, so that i wondered if he could hear me: "you shot three times. you
have got two more shots in it."

but the smile was gone from it. "in this pistol?" he said. it was like he was examining a pistol
for the first time, so slow and careful it was that he passed it from his right to his left hand
and let it hang again, pointing down again. "well, well, well. sholy i ain't forgot how to
count as well as how to shoot." there was a bird somewhere--a yellowhammer--i had been
hearing it all the time; even the three shots hadn't frightened it. and i could hear ringo,
too, making a kind of whimpering sound when he breathed, and it was like i wasn't trying
to watch grumby so much as to keep from looking at ringo. "well, she's safe enough now,
since it don't look like i can even shoot with my right hand."

what order. because he was big and squat, like a bear. but when we had first seen him he
was a captive, and so, even now he seemed more like a stump than even an animal,
even though we had watched him leap and catch up the pistol and run firing after the
other two. all i know is, one second he was standing there in his muddy confederate coat,
smiling at us, with his ragged teeth showing a little in his red stubble, with the thin sunlight
on the stubble and on his shoulders and cuffs, on the dark marks where the braid had
been ripped away; and the next second there were two bright orange splashes, one after
the other, against the middle of the gray coat and the coat itself swelling slow down on

then it happened. i know what did happen, but even now i don't know how, in

"well, boys," he said, "it looks like you have got me. durn my hide for letting matt

his face didn't change, or i couldn't see it change. it just lowered, looking down,

i reckon i heard the sound, and i reckon i must have heard the bullets, and i reckon

it was almost dark when we rode through jefferson; it was raining again when we

the earth had sunk too now, after two months; it was almost level now, like at first

then i was free. i saw ringo straddle of grumby's back and grumby getting up from

me like when granny told us about the balloon she saw in st. louis and we would dream
about it.

i felt him when he hit me, but i don't remember it. i just remember the two bright flashes
and the gray coat rushing down, and then the ground hitting me. but i could smell him--
the smell of man sweat, and the gray coat grinding into my face and smelling of horse
sweat and wood smoke and grease--and i could hear him, and then i could hear my arm
socket, and i thought "in a minute i will hear my fingers breaking, but i have got to hold
onto it" and then--i don't know whether it was under or over his arm or his leg--i saw ringo,
in the air, looking exactly like a frog, even to the eyes, with his mouth open too and his
open pocket knife in his hand.

his hands and knees and i tried to raise the pistol only my arm wouldn't move. then
grumby bucked ringo off just like a steer would and whirled again, looking at us,
crouched, with his mouth open too; and then my arm began to come up with the pistol
and he turned and ran. he shouldn't have tried to run from us in boots. or maybe that
made no difference either, because now my arm had come up and now i could see
grumby's back (he didn't scream, he never made a sound) and the pistol both at the
same time and the pistol was level and steady as a rock.


4

it took us the rest of that day and part of the night to reach the old compress. but it didn't
take very long to ride home because we went fast with the two mounts apiece to change
to, and what we had to carry now, wrapped in a piece of the skirt of grumby's coat, didn't
weigh anything.

rode past the brick piles and the sooty walls that hadn't fallen down yet, and went on
through what used to be the square. we hitched the mules in the cedars and ringo was
just starting off to find a board when we saw that somebody had already put one up--mrs.
compson, i reckon, or maybe uncle buck when he got back home. we already had the
piece of wire.

granny had not wanted to be dead either but now she had begun to be reconciled. we
unwrapped it from the jagged square of stained faded gray cloth and fastened it to the
board. "now she can lay good and quiet," ringo said.

we had ridden a lot, and during the last week we hadn't slept much and we hadn't
always had anything to eat.

first batch of mules we got for nothing."


''yes," i said. and then we both began to cry. we stood there in the slow rain, crying.

"it wasn't him or ab snopes either that kilt her," ringo said. "it was them mules. that

"yes," i said. "let's go home. i reckon louvinia is worried about us."

so we went to bed. we couldn't even stay awake to eat the supper louvinia

"the proof and the expiation!" uncle buck hollered. "when me and john sartoris

"what?" i said. "father? father's home? father?"
"and miss drusilla!" louvinia hollered, crying and praying and pawing at me, and

so it was good and dark when we came to the cabin. and then we saw that it was

lighted like for christmas; we could see the big fire and the lamp, clean and bright, when
louvinia opened the door long before we had got to it and ran out into the rain and
began to paw at me, crying and hollering.


hollering and scolding at ringo all at once. "home! hit done finished! all but the
surrendering. and now marse john done home." she finally told us how father and drusilla
had come home about a week ago and uncle buck told father where ringo and i were,
and how father had tried to make drusilla wait at home, but she refused, and how they
were looking for us, with uncle buck to show the way.

cooked for us; ringo and i went to bed in our clothes on the pallet, and went to sleep all in
one motion, with louvinia's face hanging over us and still scolding, and joby in the
chimney corner where louvinia had made him get up out of granny's chair. and then
somebody was pulling at me, and i thought i was fighting ab snopes again, and then it
was the rain in father's beard and clothes that i smelled. but uncle buck was still hollering,
and father holding me, and ringo and i held to him, and then it was drusilla kneeling and
holding me and ringo, and we could smell the rain in her hair, too, while she was hollering
at uncle buck to hush. father's hand was hard; i could see his face beyond drusilla and i
was trying to say, "father, father," while she was holding me and ringo with the rain smell
of her hair all around us, and uncle buck hollering and joby looking at uncle buck with his
mouth open and his eyes round.

"yes, by godfrey! not only tracked him down and caught him but brought back
the actual proof of it to where rosa millard could rest quiet." "the which?" joby hollered.
"fotch back the which?" "hush! hush!" drusilla said. "that's all done, all finished. you, uncle
buck!"

and drusilla rode up to that old compress, the first thing we see was that murdering
scoundrel pegged out on the door to it like a coon hide, all except the right hand. 'and if
anybody wants to see that, too,' i told john sartoris, 'just let them ride into jefferson and
look on rosa millard's grave!' ain't i told you he is john sartoris' boy? hey? ain't i told you?"


skirmish at sartoris

when i think of that day, of father's old troop on their horses drawn up facing the house,
and father and drusilla on the ground with that carpet bagger voting box in front of them,
and opposite them the women--aunt louisa, mrs. habersham and all the others--on the
porch and the two sets of them, the men and the women, facing one another like they
were both waiting for a bugle to sound the charge, i think i know the reason. i think it was
because father's troop (like all the other southern soldiers too), even though they had
surrendered and said that they were whipped, were still soldiers. maybe from the old habit
of doing everything as one man; maybe when you have lived for four years in a world
ordered completely by men's doings, even when it is danger and fighting, you don't want

i remember the night we got the letter and found out at last where drusilla was. it

to quit that world: maybe the danger and the fighting are the reasons, because men have
been pacifists for every reason under the sun except to avoid danger and fighting. and so
now father's troop and all the other men in jefferson, and aunt louisa and mrs.
habersham and all the women in jefferson were actually enemies for the reason that the
men had given in and admitted that they belonged to the united states but the women
had never surrendered.

was just before christmas in 1864, after the yankees had burned jefferson and gone away,
and we didn't even know for sure if the war was still going on or not. all we knew was that
for three years the country had been full of yankees, and then all of a sudden they were
gone and there were no men there at all anymore. we hadn't even heard from father
since july, from carolina, so that now we lived in a world of burned towns and houses and
ruined plantations and fields inhabited only by women. ringo and i were fifteen then; we
felt almost exactly like we had to eat and sleep and change our clothes in a hotel built
only for ladies and children.

the envelope was worn and dirty and it had been opened once and then glued
back, but we could still make out hawkhurst, gihon county, alabama on it even though
we did not recognise aunt louisa's hand at first. it was addressed to granny; it was six
pages cut with scissors from wallpaper and written on both sides with pokeberry juice and i
thought of that night eighteen months ago when drusilla and i stood outside the cabin at
hawkhurst and listened to the niggers passing in the road, the night when she told me
about the dog, about keeping the dog quiet, and then asked me to ask father to let her
join his troop and ride with him. but i didn't tell father. maybe i forgot it. then the yankees
went away, and father and his troop went away too. then, six months later, we had a
letter from him about how they were fighting in carolina, and a month after that we had
one from aunt louisa that drusilla was gone too, a short letter on the wallpaper that you
could see where aunt louisa had cried in the pokeberry juice about how she did not know
where drusilla was but that she had expected the worst ever since drusilla had
deliberately tried to unsex herself by refusing to feel any natural grief at the death in battle
not only of her affianced husband but of her own father and that she took it for granted
that drusilla was with us and though she did not expect drusilla to take any steps herself to
relieve a mother's anxiety, she hoped that granny would. but we didn't know where
drusilla was either.

not only taken along with them all living men blue and gray and white and black, but
even one young girl who had happened to try to look and act like a man after her
sweetheart was killed.

so then the next letter came. only granny wasn't there to read it because she was
dead then (it was the time when grumby doubled back past jefferson and so ringo and i
spent one night at home and found the letter when mrs. compson had sent it out) and so
for a while ringo and i couldn't make out what aunt louisa was trying to tell us. this one
was on the same wallpaper too, six pages this time, only aunt louisa hadn't cried in the
pokeberry juice this time: ringo said because she must have been writing too fast:

dear sister:

i think this will be news to you as it was to me though i both hope and pray it will not
be the heartrending shock to you it was to me as naturally it cannot since you are only an
aunt while i am the mother. but it is not myself i am thinking of since i am a woman, a

she had just vanished. it was like the yankees in just passing through the south had

that's how it sounded. ringo was holding a pineknot for me to read by, but after a

mother, a southern woman, and it has been our lot during the last four years to learn to
bear anything. but when i think of my husband who laid down his life to protect a heritage
of courageous men and spotless women looking down from heaven upon a daughter
who had deliberately cast away that for which he died, and when i think of my half-
orphan son who will one day ask of me why his martyred father's sacrifice was not enough
to preserve his sister's good name--

while he had to light another pineknot and all the farther we had got was how when
gavin breckbridge was killed at shiloh before he and drusilla had had time to marry, there
had been reserved for drusilla the highest destiny of a southern woman--to be the bride--
widow of a lost cause--and how drusilla had not only thrown that away, she had not only
become a lost woman and a shame to her father's memory but she was now living in a
word that aunt louisa would not even repeat but that granny knew what it was, though
at least thank god that father and drusilla were not actually any blood kin, it being
father's wife who was drusilla's cousin by blood and not father himself. so then ringo lit the
other pine-knot and then we put the sheets of wallpaper down on the floor and then we
found out what it was: how drusilla had been gone for six months and no word from her
except she was alive, and then one night she walked into the cabin where aunt louisa
and denny were (and now it had a line drawn under it, like this:) in the garments not alone
of a man but of a common private soldier and told them how she had been a member of
father's troop for six months, bivouacking at night surrounded by sleeping men and not
even bothering to put up the tent for her and father except when the weather was bad,
and how drusilla not only showed neither shame nor remorse but actually pretended she
did not even know what aunt louisa was talking about; how when aunt louisa told her
that she and father must marry at once, drusilla said, "can't you understand that i am tired
of burying husbands in this war? that i am riding in cousin john's troop not to find a man
but to hurt yankees?" and how aunt louisa said:



2

the third letter did not come to us at all. it came to mrs. compson. drusilla and father were
home then. it was in the spring and the war was over now, and we were busy getting the
cypress and oak out of the bottom to build the house and drusilla working with joby and
ringo and father and me like another man, with her hair shorter than it had been at
hawkhurst and her face sunburned from riding in the weather and her body thin from living
like soldiers lived. after granny died ringo and louvinia and i all slept in the cabin, but
after father came ringo and louvinia moved back to the other cabin with joby and now
father and i slept on ringo's and my pallet and drusilla slept in the bed behind the quilt
curtain where granny used to sleep. and so one night i remembered aunt louisa's letter
and i showed it to drusilla and father, and father found out that drusilla had not written to
tell aunt louisa where she was and father said she must, and so one day mrs. compson
came out with the third letter. drusilla and ringo and louvinia too were down in the
bottom at the sawmill and i saw that one too, on the wallpaper with the pokeberry juice
and the juice not cried on this time either, and this the first time mrs. compson had come
out since granny died and not even getting out of her surrey but sitting there holding to

"at least don't call him cousin john where strangers can hear you."

because it was not her: it was mrs. habersham, that never had been out here

her parasol with one hand and her shawl with the other and looking around like when
drusilla would come out of the house or from around the corner it would not be just a thin
sunburned girl in a man's shirt and pants but maybe something like a tame panther or
bear. this one sounded just like the others: about how aunt louisa was addressing a
stranger to herself but not a stranger to granny and that there were times when the good
name of one family was the good name of all and that she naturally did not expect mrs.
compson to move out and live with father and drusilla because even that would be too
late now to preserve the appearance of that which had never existed anyway. but that
mrs. compson was a woman too, aunt louisa believed, a southern woman too, and had
suffered too, aunt louisa didn't doubt, only she did hope and pray that mrs. compson had
been spared the sight of her own daughter if mrs. compson had one flouting and
outraging all southern principles of purity and womanhood that our husbands had died
for, though aunt louisa hoped again that mrs. compson's husband (mrs. compson was a
good deal older than granny and the only husband she had ever had had been locked
up for crazy a long time ago because in the slack part of the afternoons he would gather
up eight or ten little niggers from the quarters and line them up across the creek from him
with sweet potatoes on their heads and he would shoot the potatoes off with a rifle; he
would tell them he might miss a potato but he wasn't going to miss a nigger, and so they
would stand mighty still) had not made one of the number. so i couldn't make any sense
out of that one too and i still didn't know what aunt louisa was talking about and i didn't
believe that mrs. compson knew either.

before and that granny never had been to see that i knew of. because mrs. compson
didn't stay, she didn't even get out of the surrey, sitting there kind of drawn up under the
shawl and looking at me and then at the cabin like she didn't know just what might come
out of it or out from behind it. then she begun to tap the nigger driver on his head with the
parasol and they went away, the two old horses going pretty fast back down the drive
and back down the road to town. and the next afternoon when i came out of the bottom
to go to the spring with the water bucket there were five surreys and buggies in front of the
cabin and inside the cabin there were fourteen of them that had come the four miles out
from jefferson, in the sunday clothes that the yankees and the war had left them, that
had husbands dead in the war or alive back in jefferson helping father with what he was
doing, because they were strange times then. only like i said, maybe times are never
strange to women: that it is just one continuous monotonous thing full of the repeated
follies of their menfolks. mrs. compson was sitting in granny's chair, still holding the parasol
and drawn up under her shawl and looking like she had finally seen whatever it was she
had expected to see, and it had been the panther. it was mrs. habersham who was
holding back the quilt for the others to go in and look at the bed where drusilla slept and
then showing them the pallet where father and i slept. then she saw me and said, "and
who is this?"


them. it sounded like a ladies' club meeting with mrs. habersham running it, because every
now and then mrs. habersham would forget to whisper: "--mother should come, be sent for
at once. but lacking her presence . . . we, the ladies of the community, mothers ourselves. .
. . child probably taken advantage of by gallant romantic . . . before realising the price
she must--" and mrs. compson said, "hush! hush!" and then somebody else said, "do you
really suppose--" and then mrs. habersham forgot to whisper good: "what else? what other

"that's bayard," mrs. compson said.
"you poor child," mrs. habersham said. so i didn't stop. but i couldn't help but hear

we just looked at her; when drusilla finally spoke, she sounded like ringo and i

"my condition," drusilla said. "my con . . . help and sym--" then she began to say,

"yes," mrs. habersham said. "no mother, no woman to . . . forced to these straits--"

reason can you name why she should choose to conceal herself down there in the woods
all day long, lifting heavy weights like logs and--"

then i went away. i filled the bucket at the spring and went back to the log-yard
where drusilla and ringo and joby were feeding the bandsaw and the blindfolded mule
going round and round in the sawdust. and then joby kind of made a sound and we all
stopped and looked and there was mrs. habersham, with three of the others kind of
peeping out from behind her with their eyes round and bright, looking at drusilla standing
there in the sawdust and shavings, in her dirty sweated overalls and shirt and brogans, with
her face sweat-streaked with sawdust and her short hair yellow with it. "i am martha
habersham," mrs. habersham said. "i am a neighbor and i hope to be a friend." and then
she said, "you poor child."

would when father would say something to us in latin for a joke. "ma'am?" drusilla said.
because i was just fifteen; i still didn't know what it was all about; i just stood there and
listened without even thinking much, like when they had been talking in the cabin. "my
condition?" drusilla said. "my--"

kind of waving her hand at the mules that hadn't stopped and at joby and ringo
goggling at her and the three others still peeping around her at drusilla. "--to offer you not
only our help, but our sympathy."

"oh. oh. oh," standing there, and then she was running. she began to run like a deer, that
starts to run and then decides where it wants to go; she turned right in the air and came
toward me, running light over the logs and planks, with her mouth open, saying "john,
john" not loud; for a minute it was like she thought i was father until she waked up and
found i was not; she stopped without even ceasing to run, like a bird stops in the air,
motionless yet still furious with movement. "is that what you think too?" she said. then she
was gone. every now and then i could see her footprints, spaced and fast, just inside the
woods, but when i came out of the bottom, i couldn't see her. but the surreys and buggies
were still in front of the cabin and i could see mrs. compson and the other ladies on the
porch, looking out across the pasture toward the bottom, so i did not go there. but before i
came to the other cabin, where louvinia and joby and ringo lived, i saw louvinia come
up the hill from the spring, carrying her cedar water bucket and singing. then she went into
the cabin and the singing stopped short off and so i knew where drusilla was. but i didn't
hide. i went to the window and looked in and saw drusilla just turning from where she had
been leaning her head in her arms on the mantel when louvinia came in with the water
bucket and a gum twig in her mouth and father's old hat on top of her head rag. drusilla
was crying. "that's what it is, then," she said. "coming down there to the mill and telling me
that in my condition--sympathy and help--strangers; i never saw any of them before and i
don't care a damn what they--but you and bayard. is that what you believe? that john
and i--that we--" then louvinia moved. her hand came out quicker than drusilla could jerk
back and lay flat on the belly of drusilla's overalls, then louvinia was holding drusilla in her
arms like she used to hold me and drusilla was crying hard. "that john and i--that we--and
gavin dead at shiloh and john's home burned and his plantation ruined, that he and i--
we went to the war to hurt yankees, not hunting women!"
"i knows you ain't," louvinia said. "hush now. hush."


"do you know what i ain't?" he said. "what?" i said.
"i ain't a nigger any more. i done been abolished." then i asked him what he was, if

"cassius q. benbow?" i said.
"co-rect," ringo said. "uncle cash that druv the benbow carriage twell he run off

and that's about all. it didn't take them long. i don't know whether mrs. habersham


made mrs. compson send for aunt louisa or whether aunt louisa just gave them a
deadline and then came herself. because we were busy, drusilla and joby and ringo and
me at the mill, and father in town; we wouldn't see him from the time he would ride away
in the morning until when he would get back, sometimes late at night. because they were
strange times then. for four years we had lived for just one thing, even the women and
children who could not fight: to get yankee troops out of the country; we thought that
when that happened, it would be all over. and now that had happened, and then before
the summer began i heard father say to drusilla, "we were promised federal troops;
lincoln himself promised to send us troops. then things will be all right." that, from a man
who had commanded a regiment for four years with the avowed purpose of driving
federal troops from the country. now it was as though we had not surrendered at all, we
had joined forces with the men who had been our enemies against a new foe whose
means we could not always fathom but whose aim we could always dread. so he was
busy in town all day long. they were building jefferson back, the courthouse and the
stores, but it was more than that which father and the other men were doing; it was
something which he would not let drusilla or me or ringo go into town to see. then one
day ringo slipped off and went to town and came back and he looked at me with his
eyes rolling a little.


he wasn't a nigger any more and he showed me what he had in his hand. it was a new
scrip dollar; it was drawn on the united states, resident treasurer, yoknapatawpha
county, mississippi, and signed "cassius q. benbow, acting marshal" in a neat clerk's hand,
with a big sprawling x under it.


with the yankees two years ago. he back now and he gonter be elected marshal of
jefferson. that's what marse john and the other white folks is so busy about."


told me about the two burdens from missouri, with a patent from washington to organise
the niggers into republicans, and how father and the other men were trying to prevent it
"naw, suh," he said. "this war ain't over. hit jus started good. used to be when you seed a
yankee you knowed him because he never had nothing but a gun or a mule halter or a
handful of hen feathers. now you don' even know him and stid of the gun he got a clutch
of this stuff in one hand and a clutch of nigger voting tickets in the yuther." so we were
busy; we just saw father at night and sometimes then ringo and i and even drusilla would
take one look at him and we wouldn't ask him any questions. so it didn't take them long,
because drusilla was already beaten; she was just marking time without knowing it from
that afternoon when the fourteen ladies got into the surreys and buggies and went back
to town until one afternoon about two months later when we heard denny hollering even
before the wagon came in the gates, and aunt louisa sitting on one of the trunks (that's
what beat drusilla: the trunks. they had her dresses in them that she hadn't worn in three
years; ringo never had seen her in a dress until aunt louisa came) in mourning even to the
crepe bow on her umbrella handle, that hadn't worn mourning when we were at
hawkhurst two years ago though uncle dennison was just as dead then as he was now,

"a nigger?" i said. "a nigger?"
"no," ringo said. "they ain't no more niggers, in jefferson nor nowhere else." then he

she was already beaten. aunt louisa made her put on a dress that night; we

"it is not pleasant to me, colonel sartoris," aunt louisa said. "and after a year, i

she came to the cabin and got out of the wagon, already crying and talking just like the
letters sounded, like even when you listened to her you had to skif around fast to make any
sense:
"i have come to appeal to them once more with a mother's tears though i don't

think it will do any good though i had prayed until the very last that this boy's innocence
might be spared and preserved but what must be must be and at least we can all three
bear our burden together"; sitting in granny's chair in the middle of the room, without even
laying down the umbrella or taking her bonnet off, looking at the pallet where father and
i slept and then at the quilt nailed to the rafter to make a room for drusilla, dabbing at her
mouth with a handkerchief that made the whole cabin smell like dead roses. and then
drusilla came in from the mill, in the muddy brogans and the sweaty shirt and overalls and
her hair sunburned and full of sawdust, and aunt louisa looked at her once and began to
cry again, saying, "lost, lost. thank god in his mercy that dennison hawk was taken before
he lived to see what i see."

watched her run out of the cabin in it and run down the hill toward the spring while we
were waiting for father. and he came and walked into the cabin where aunt louisa was
still sitting in granny's chair with the handkerchief before her mouth. "this is a pleasant
surprise, miss louisa," father said.

suppose i cannot call it surprise. but it is still a shock." so father came out too and we went
down to the spring and found drusilla hiding behind the big beech, crouched down like
she was trying to hide the skirt from father even while he raised her up. "what's a dress?" he
said. "it don't matter. come. get up, soldier."

whipped; like in the dress she could neither fight back nor run away. and so she didn't
come down to the log-yard any more, and now that father and i slept in the cabin with
joby and ringo, i didn't even see drusilla except at mealtime. and we were busy getting
the timber out, and now everybody was talking about the election and how father had
told the two burdens before all the men in town that the election would never be held with
cash benbow or any other nigger in it and how the burdens had dared him to stop it. and
besides, the other cabin would be full of jefferson ladies all day; you would have thought
that drusilla was mrs. habersham's daughter and not aunt louisa's. they would begin to
arrive right after breakfast and stay all day, so that at supper aunt louisa would sit in her
black mourning except for the bonnet and umbrella, with a wad of some kind of black
knitting she carried around with her and that never got finished and the folded
handkerchief handy in her belt (only she ate fine; she ate more than father even because
the election was just a week off and i reckon he was thinking about the burdens) and
refusing to speak to anybody except denny; and drusilla trying to eat, with her face
strained and thin and her eyes like somebody's that had been whipped a long time now
and is going just on nerve.

than i was, but she had let aunt louisa and mrs. habersham choose the game and she
had beat them both until that night when aunt louisa went behind her back and chose a
game she couldn't beat. i was coming up to supper; i heard them inside the cabin before i
could stop: "can't you believe me?" drusilla said. "can't you understand that in the troop i
was just another man and not much of one at that, and since we came home here i am
just another mouth for john to feed, just a cousin of john's wife and not much older than

then drusilla broke; they beat her. because she was strong; she wasn't much older

but she was beaten, like as soon as she let them put the dress on her she was

"you wish to tell me that you, a young woman, associated with him, a still young

his own son?" and i could almost see aunt louisa sitting there with that knitting that never
progressed:

man, day and night for a year, running about the country with no guard nor check of any
sort upon--do you take me for a complete fool?" so that night aunt louisa beat her; we
had just sat down to supper when aunt louisa looked at me like she had been waiting for
the noise of the bench to stop: "bayard, i do not ask your forgiveness for this because it is
your burden too; you are an innocent victim as well as dennison and i--" then she looked
at father, thrust back in granny's chair (the only chair we had) in her black dress, the black
wad of knitting beside her plate. "colonel sartoris," she said, "i am a woman; i must request
that the husband whom i have lost and the man son which i have not would demand,
perhaps at the point of a pistol.--will you marry my daughter?"

i got out. i moved fast; i heard the light sharp sound when drusilla's head went
down between her flungout arms on the table, and the sound the bench made when
father got up too; i passed him standing beside drusilla with his hand on her head. "they
have beat you, drusilla," he said.


3

mrs. habersham got there before we had finished breakfast the next morning. i don't
know how aunt louisa got word in to her so quick. but there she was, and she and aunt
louisa set the wedding for the day after tomorrow. i don't reckon they even knew that that
was the day father had told the burdens cash benbow would never be elected marshal in
jefferson. i don't reckon they paid any more attention to it than if all the men had decided
that day after tomorrow all the clocks in jefferson were to be set back or up an hour.
maybe they didn't even know there was to be an election, that all the , men in the county
would be riding toward jefferson tomorrow with pistols in their pockets, and that the
burdens already had their nigger voters camped in a cotton gin on the edge of town
under guard. i don't reckon they even cared. because like father said, women cannot
believe that anything can be right or wrong or even be very important that can be
decided by a lot of little scraps of scribbled paper dropped into a box.

it was to be a big wedding; all jefferson was to be invited and mrs. habersham
planning to bring the three bottles of madeira she had been saving for five years now
when aunt louisa began to cry again. but they caught on quick now; now all of them
were patting aunt louisa's hands and giving her vinegar to smell and mrs. habersham
saying, "of course. you poor thing. a public wedding now, after a year, would be a public
notice of the . . ." so they decided it would be a reception, because mrs. habersham said
how a reception could be held for a bridal couple at any time, even ten years later. so
drusilla was to ride into town, meet father and be married as quick and quiet as possible,
with just me and one other for witnesses to make it legal; none of the ladies themselves
would even be present. then they would come back home and we would have the
reception.

tablecloths and silver like for a church supper. mrs. habersham brought a veil and a
wreath and they all helped drusilla to dress, only aunt louisa made drusilla put on father's

so they began to arrive early the next morning, with baskets of food and

"who?" aunt louisa hollered. "where have you been?"
"to town!" benny hollered. "them two burdens! they kilt um!"
"who killed them?" aunt louisa hollered.
"drusilla and cousin john!" benny hollered. then louvinia said how aunt louisa

big riding cloak over the veil and wreath too, and ringo brought the horses up, all curried
and brushed, and i helped drusilla on with aunt louisa and the others all watching from
the porch. but i didn't know that ringo was missing when we started, not even when i
heard aunt louisa hollering for benny while we rode down the drive. it was louvinia that
told about it, about how after we left the ladies set and decorated the table and spread
the wedding breakfast and how they were all watching the gate and aunt louisa still
hollering for benny now and then when they saw ringo and benny come up the drive
riding double on one of the mules at a gallop, with benny's eyes round as^ doorknobs and
already hollering. "they kilt um! they kilt um!"




hollered sure enough.
"so you mean to tell me that drusilla and that man are not married yet?"


because we didn't have time. maybe drusilla and father would have, but when we
came into the square we saw the crowd of niggers kind of huddled beyond the hotel door
with six or eight strange white men herding them, and then all of a sudden i saw the
jefferson men, the men that i knew, that father knew, running across the square toward
the hotel with each one holding his hip like a man runs with a pistol in his pocket. and then
i saw the men who were father's troop lined up before the hotel door, blocking it off. and
then i was sliding off my horse too and watching drusilla struggling with george wyatt. but
he didn't have hold of her, he just had hold of the cloak, and then she was through the line
of them and running toward the hotel with her wreath on one side of her head and the
veil streaming behind. but george held me. he threw the cloak down and held me. "let
go," i said. "father."


derringer," george said. "steady, now."

at the door. i don't know how long it was. "the last two was that derringer," george said. i
don't know how long it was. the old nigger that was mrs. holston's porter, that was too old
even to be free, stuck his head out once and said "gret gawd" and ducked back. then
drusilla came out, carrying the ballot box, the wreath on one side of her head and the veil
twisted about her arm, and then father came out behind her, brushing his new beaver hat
on his sleeve. and then it was loud; i could hear them when they drew in their breath like
when the yankees used to hear it begin:

anything.


derringer."

in sight, slow.

"steady, now," george said, holding me. "john's just gone in to vote."
"but there are two of them!" i said. "let me go!" "john's got two shots in the

but they held me. and then we heard the three shots and we all turned and looked

"yaaaaa--" but father raised his hand and they stopped. then you couldn't hear

"we heard a pistol too," george said. "did they touch you?"
"no," father said. "i let them fire first. you all heard. you boys can swear to my

"yes," george said. "we all heard." now father looked at all of them, at all the faces

"does any man here want a word with me about this?" he said. but you could not

hear anything, not even moving. the herd of niggers stood like they had when i first saw
them, with the northern white men herding them together. father put his hat on and took
the ballot box from drusilla and helped her back onto her horse and handed the ballot
box up to her. then he looked around again,' at all of them. "this election will be held out
at my home," he said. "i hereby appoint drusilla hawk voting commissioner until the votes
are cast and counted. does any man here object?" but he stopped them again with his
hand before it had begun good. "not now, boys," he said. he turned to drusilla. "go home,
i will go to the sheriff, and then i will follow you."

the rest of us will come with you."

but father would not let them. "don't you see we are working for peace through
law and order?" he said. "i will make bond and then follow you. you do as i say." so we
went on; we turned in the gates with drusilla in front, the ballot box on her pommel--us and
father's men and about a hundred more, and rode on up to the cabin where the buggies
and surreys were standing, and drusilla passed the ballot box to me and got down and
took the box again and was walking toward the cabin when she stopped dead still. i
reckon she and i both remembered at the same time and i reckon that even the others,
the men, knew all of a sudden that something was wrong. because like father said, i
reckon women don't ever surrender: not only victory, but not even defeat. because that's
how we were stopped when aunt louisa and the other ladies came out on the porch, and
then father shoved past me and jumped down beside drusilla. but aunt louisa never even
looked at him.
"so you are not married," she said.

"i forgot," drusilla said.

"you forgot? you forgot?"

"i . . ." drusilla said. "we . . ."


now aunt louisa looked at us; she looked along the line of us sitting there in our
saddles; she looked at me too just like she did at the others, like she had never seen me
before. "and who are these, pray? your wedding train of forgetters? your groomsmen of
murder and robbery?"
"they came to vote," drusilla said.


"to vote," aunt louisa said. "ah. to vote. since you have forced your mother and
brother to live under a roof of license and adultery you think you can also force them--to
live in a polling booth refuge from violence and bloodshed, do you? bring me that box."
but drusilla didn't move, standing there in her torn dress and the ruined veil and the twisted
wreath hanging from her hair by a few pins. aunt louisa came down the steps; we didn't
know what she was going to do: we just sat there and watched her snatch the polling box
from drusilla and fling it across the yard. "come into the house," she said. "no," drusilla said.


commissioner." "so you refuse?"

mud. "john said that i--"

"come into the house. i will send for a minister myself."
"no," drusilla said. "this is an election. don't you understand? i am voting

"like hell you will," george wyatt said. "some of the boys will ride out with drusilla.

"i have to. i must." she sounded like a little girl that has been caught playing in the

then aunt louisa began to cry. she stood there in the black dress, without the

and that's all. they rode back to town then, carrying the box, with father and


knitting and for the first time that i ever saw it, without even the handkerchief, crying, until
mrs. habersham came and led her back into the house. then they voted. that didn't take
long either. they set the box on the sawchunk where louvinia washed, and ringo got the
pokeberry juice and an old piece of window shade, and they cut it into ballots. "let all
who want the honorable cassius q. benbow to be marshal of jefferson write yes on his
ballot; opposed, no," father said.
"and i'll do the writing and save some more time," george wyatt said. so he made

a pack of the ballots and wrote them against his saddle and fast as he would write them
the men would take them and drop them into the box and drusilla would call their names
out. we could hear aunt louisa still crying inside the cabin and we could see the other
ladies watching us through the window. it didn't take long. "you needn't bother to count
them," george said. "they all voted no."

drusilla in the torn wedding dress and the crooked wreath and veil standing beside the
sawchunk, watching them. only this time even father could not have stopped them. it
came back high and thin and ragged and fierce, like when the yankees used to hear it
out of the smoke and the galloping: "yaaaaay, drusilla!" they hollered. "yaaaaaay, john
sartoris! yaaaaaaay!"


an odor of verbena

it was just after supper. i had just opened my coke on the table beneath the lamp; i
heard professor wilkins' feet in the hall and then the instant of silence as he put his hand to
the door knob, and i should have known. people talk glibly of presentiment, but i had
none. i heard his feet on the stairs and then in the hall approaching and there was nothing
in the feet because although i had lived in his house for three college years now and
although both he and mrs. wilkins called me bayard in the house, he would no more have
entered my room without knocking than i would have entered his--or hers. then he flung
the door violently inward against the doorstop with one of those gestures with or by which
an almost painfully unflagging preceptory of youth ultimately aberrates, and stood there
saying, "bayard. bayard, my son, my dear son."

because i remember how i closed the book carefully, even marking the place, before i
rose. he (professor wilkins) was doing something, bustling at something; it was my hat and
cloak which he handed me and which i took although i would not need the cloak, unless
even then i was thinking (although it was october, the equinox had not occurred) that the
rains and the cool weather would arrive before i should see this room again and so i would
need the cloak anyway to return to it if i returned, thinking 'god, if he had only done this
last night, flung that door crashing and bouncing against the stop last night without
knocking so i could have gotten there before it happened, been there when it did, beside
him on whatever spot, wherever it was that he would have to fall and lie in the dust and
dirt.'

told me (someone did; it must have been judge wilkins) how ringo had apparently flung

"your boy is downstairs in the kitchen," he said. it was not until years later that he

i should have known; i should have been prepared. or maybe i was prepared

he followed me from the room. from now until ringo and i rode away into the hot

"yes, sir," i said. "a fresh horse for my boy. he will want to go back with me."
"by all means take mine--mrs. wilkins'," he cried. his tone was no different yet he did

the cook aside and come on into the house and into the library where he and mrs. wilkins
were sitting and said without preamble and already turning to withdraw: "they shot
colonel sartoris this morning. tell him i be waiting in the kitchen," and was gone before
either of them could move. "he has ridden forty miles yet he refuses to eat anything." we
were moving toward the door now--the door on my side of which i had lived for three
years now with what i knew, what i knew now i must have believed and expected, yet
beyond which i had heard the approaching feet yet heard nothing in the feet. "if there
was just anything i could do."


cry it and i suppose that at the same moment we both realised that was funny--a short-
legged deep-barrelled mare who looked exactly like a spinster music teacher, which mrs.
wilkins drove to a basket phaeton--which was good for me, like being doused with a pail
of cold water would have been good for me.

stable when i get my mare." good for me, because even before i finished speaking i knew
that would not be necessary either, that ringo would have stopped at the livery stable
before he came out to the college and attended to that and that the fresh horse for him
and my mare both would be saddled and waiting now at the side fence and we would
not have to go through oxford at all. loosh would not have thought of that if he had
come for me, he would have come straight to the college, to professor wilkins', and told his
news and then sat down and let me take charge from then on. but not ringo.

thick dusty darkness quick and strained for the overdue equinox like a laboring delayed
woman, he would be somewhere either just beside me or just behind me and i never to
know exactly nor care which. he was trying to find the words with which to offer me his
pistol too. i could almost hear him: "ah, this unhappy land; not ten years recovered from
the fever yet still men must kill one another, still we must pay cain's price in his own coin."
but he did not actually say it. he just followed me, somewhere beside or behind me as we
descended the stairs toward where mrs. wilkins waited in the hall beneath the chandelier--
a thin gray woman who reminded me of granny, not that she looked like granny probably
but because she had known granny--a lifted anxious still face which was thinking who
lives by the sword shall die by it just as granny would have thought, toward which i
walked, had to walk not because i was granny's grandson and had lived in her house for
three college years and was about the age of her son when he was killed in almost the last
battle nine years ago, but because i was now the sartoris (the sartoris: that had been one
of the concomitant flashes, along with the at last it has happened when professor wilkins
opened my door.) she didn't offer me a horse and pistol, not because she liked me any
less than professor wilkins but because she was a woman and so wiser than any man, else
the men would not have gone on with the war for two years after they knew they were
whipped. she just put her hands (a small woman, no bigger than granny had been) on my
shoulders and said, "give my love to drusilla and your aunt jenny. and come back when
you can."

have to attend to."

door bouncing into the stop yet already i was beginning to realise, to become aware of

"thank you, sir," i said. "we won't need it. i will get a fresh horse for him at the livery

"only i don't know when that will be," i said. "i don't know how many things i will

yes, i lied even to her; it had not been but a minute yet since he had flung that

that which i still had no yardstick to measure save that one consisting of what, despite
myself, despite my raising and background (or maybe because of them) i had for some
time known i was becoming and had feared the test of it; i remember how i thought while
her hands still rested on my shoulders: at least this will be my chance to find out if i am
what i think i am or if i just hope; if i am going to do what i have taught myself is right or if i
am just going to wish i were.

we went on to the kitchen, professor wilkins still somewhere beside or behind me
and still offering me the pistol and horse in a dozen different ways. ringo was waiting; i
remember how i thought then that no matter what might happen to either of us, i would
never be the sartoris to him. he was twenty-four too, but in a way he had changed even
less than i had since that day when we had nailed grumby's body to the door of the old
compress. maybe it was because he had outgrown me, had changed so much that
summer while he and granny traded mules with the yankees that since then i had had to
do most of the changing just to catch up with him. he was sitting quietly in a chair beside
the cold stove, spent-looking too who had ridden forty miles (at one time, either in
jefferson or when he was alone at last on the road somewhere, he had cried; dust was
now caked and dried in the tear-channels on his face) and would ride forty more yet
would not eat, looking up at me a little red-eyed with weariness (or maybe it was more
than just weariness and so i would never catch up with him) then rising without a word and
going on toward the door and i following and professor wilkins still offering the horse and
the pistol without speaking the words and still thinking (i could feel that too) dies by the
sword. dies by the sword.
ringo had the two horses saddled at the side gate, as i had known he would--the

fresh one for himself and my mare father had given me three years ago, that could do a
mile under two minutes any day and a mile every eight minutes all day long. he was
already mounted when i realised that what professor wilkins wanted was to shake my
hand. we shook hands; i knew he believed he was touching flesh which might not be alive
tomorrow night and i thought for a second how if i told him what i was going to do, since
we had talked about it, about how if there was anything at all in the book, anything of
hope and peace for his blind and bewildered spawn which he had chosen above all
others to offer immortality, thou shall not kill must be it, since maybe he even believed that
he had taught it to me except that he had not, nobody had, not even myself since it went
further than just having been learned. but i did not tell him. he was too old to be forced so,
to condone even in principle such a decision; he was too old to have to stick to principle
in the face of blood and raising and background, to be faced without warning and made
to deliver like by a highwayman out of the dark: only the young could do that--one still
young enough to have his youth supplied him gratis as a reason (not an excuse) for
cowardice.

we would not have to pass through oxford now and so soon (there was a thin sickle of
moon like the heel print of a boot in wet sand) the road to jefferson lay before us, the
road which i had travelled for the first time three years ago with father and travelled twice
at christmas time and then in june and september and twice at christmas time again and
then june and september again each college term since alone on the mare, not even
knowing that this was peace; and now this time and maybe last time who would not die (i
knew that) but who maybe forever after could never again hold up his head. the horses
took the gait which they would hold for forty miles. my mare knew the long road ahead
and ringo had a good beast too, had talked hilliard at the livery stable out of a good

so i said nothing. i just shook his hand and mounted too, and ringo and i rode on.

"no," i said. we rode on; it was october; there was plenty of time still for verbena

"we could bushwhack him," he said. "like we done grumby that day. but i reckon

horse too. maybe it was the tears, the channels of dried mud across which his strain-
reddened eyes had looked at me, but i rather think it was that same quality which used to
enable him to replenish his and granny's supply of united states army letterheads during
that time--some outrageous assurance gained from too long and too close association
with white people: the one whom he called granny, the other with whom he had slept
from the time we were born until father rebuilt the house. we spoke one time, then no
more:

that wouldn't suit that white skin you walks around in."

although i would have to reach home before i would realise there was a need for it; plenty
of time for verbena yet from the garden where aunt jenny puttered beside old joby, in a
pair of father's old cavalry gauntlets, among the coaxed and ordered beds, the quaint
and odorous old names, for though it was october no rain had come yet and hence no
frost to bring (or leave behind) the first half-warm half-chill nights of indian summer--the
drowsing air cool and empty for geese yet languid still with the old hot dusty smell of fox
grape and sassafras--the nights when before i became a man and went to college to
learn law ringo and i, with lantern and axe and crokersack and six dogs (one to follow the
trail and five more just for the tonguing, the music) would hunt possum in the pasture
where, hidden, we had seen our first yankee that afternoon on the bright horse, where for
the last year now you could hear the whistling of the trains which had no longer belonged
to mr. redmond for a long while now and which at some instant, some second during the
morning father too had relinquished along with the pipe which ringo said he was smoking,
which slipped from his hand as he fell. we rode on, toward the house where he would be
lying in the parlor now, in his regimentals (sabre too) and where drusilla would be waiting
for me beneath all the festive glitter of the chandeliers, in the yellow ball gown and the
sprig of verbena in her hair, holding the two loaded pistols (i could see that too, who had
had no presentiment; i could see her, in the formal brilliant room arranged formally for
obsequy, not tall, not slender as a woman is but as a youth, a boy, is motionless, in yellow,
the face calm, almost bemused, the head simple and severe, the balancing sprig of
verbena above each ear, the two arms bent at the elbows, the two hands shoulder high,
the two identical duelling pistols lying upon, not clutched in, one to each: the greek
amphora priestess of a succinct and formal violence).


2

drusilla said that he had a dream. i was twenty then and she and i would walk in the
garden in the summer twilight while we waited for father to ride in from the railroad. i was
just twenty then: that summer before i entered the university to take the law degree which
father decided i should have and four years after the one, the day, the evening when
father and drusilla had kept old cash benbow from becoming united states marshal and
returned home still unmarried and mrs. habersham herded them into her carriage and
drove them back to town and dug her husband out of his little dim hole in the new bank
and made him sign father's peace bond for killing the two carpet baggers, and took
father and drusilla to the minister herself and saw that they were married. and father had
rebuilt the house too, on the same blackened spot, over the same cellar, where the other

had burned, only larger, much larger: drusilla said that the house was the aura of father's
dream just as a bride's trousseau and veil, the aura of hers. and aunt jenny had come to
live with us now so we had the garden (drusilla would no more have bothered with flowers
than father himself would have, who even now, even four years after it was over, still
seemed to exist, breathe, in that last year of it while she had ridden in man's clothes and
with her hair cut short like any other member of father's troop, across georgia and both
carolinas in front of sherman's army) for her to gather sprigs of verbena from to wear in her
hair because she said verbena was the only scent you could smell above the smell of
horses and courage and so it was the only one that was worth the wearing. the railroad
was hardly begun then and father and mr. redmond were not only still partners, they
were still friends, which as george wyatt said was easily a record for father, and he would
leave the house at daybreak on jupiter, riding up and down the unfinished line with two
saddlebags of gold coins borrowed on friday to pay the men on saturday, keeping just
two cross-ties ahead of the sheriff as aunt jenny said. so we walked in the dusk, slowly
between aunt jenny's flower beds while drusilla (in a dress now, who still would have worn
pants all the time if father had let her) leaned lightly on my arm and i smelled the verbena
in her hair as i had smelled the rain in it and in father's beard that night four years ago
when he and drusilla and uncle buck mccaslin found grumby and then came home and
found ringo and me more than just asleep: escaped into that oblivion which god or
nature or whoever it was had supplied us with for the time being, who had had to perform
more than should be required of children because there should be some limit to the age,
the youth at least below which one should not have to kill. this was just after the saturday
night when he returned and i watched him clean the derringer and reload it and we
learned that the dead man was almost a neighbor, a hill man who had been in the first
infantry regiment when it voted father out of command: and we never to know if the man
actually intended to rob father or not because father had shot too quick, but only that he
had a wife and several children in a dirt-floored cabin in the hills, to whom father the next
day sent some money and she (the wife) walked into the house two days later while we
were sitting at the dinner table and flung the money at father's face.

"but nobody could have more of a dream than colonel sutpen," i said. he had
been father's second-in-command in the first regiment and had been elected colonel
when the regiment deposed father after second manassas, and it was sutpen and not
the regiment whom father never forgave. he was underbred, a cold ruthless man who
had come into the country about thirty years before the war, nobody knew from where
except father said you could look at him and know he would not dare to tell. he had got
some land and nobody knew how he did that either, and he got money from somewhere-
-father said they all believed he robbed steamboats, either as a card sharper or as an out-
and-out highwayman--and built a big house and married and set up as a gentleman.
then he lost everything in the war like everybody else, all hope of descendants too (his son
killed his daughter's fiance on the eve of the wedding and vanished) yet he came back
home and set out singlehanded to rebuild his plantation. he had no friends to borrow from
and he had nobody to leave it to and he was past sixty years old, yet he set out to rebuild
his place like it used to be; they told how he was too busy to bother with politics or
anything; how when father and the other men organised the nightriders to keep the
carpet baggers from organising the negroes into an insurrection, he refused to have
anything to do with it. father stopped hating him long enough to ride out to see sutpen
himself and he (sutpen) came to the door with a lamp and did not even invite them to
come in and discuss it; father said, "are you with us or against us?" and he said, "i'm for my
land. if every man of you would rehabilitate his own land, the country will take care of

"yes. but his dream is just sutpen. john's is not. he is thinking of this whole country

"but how can they get any good from what he wants to do for them if they are--

"killed some of them? i suppose you include those two carpet baggers he had to kill

"they were men. human beings."
"they were northerners, foreigners who had no business here. they were pirates."

itself" and father challenged him to bring the lamp out and set it on a stump where they
could both see to shoot and sutpen would not. "nobody could have more of a dream
than that."

which he is trying to raise by its bootstraps, so that all the people in it, not just his kind nor his
old regiment, but all the people, black and white, the women and children back in the
hills who don't even own shoes--don't you see?"

after he has--"

to hold that first election, don't you?"


we walked on, her weight hardly discernible on my arm, her head just reaching my
shoulder. i had always been a little taller than she, even on that night at hawkhurst while
we listened to the niggers passing in the road, and she had changed but little since--the
same boy-hard body, the close implacable head with its savagely cropped hair which i
had watched from the wagon above the tide of crazed singing niggers as we went down
into the river--the body not slender as women are but as boys are slender. "a dream is not
a very safe thing to be near, bayard. i know; i had one once. it's like a loaded pistol with a
hair trigger: if it stays alive long enough, somebody is going to be hurt. but if it's a good
dream, it's worth it. there are not many dreams in the world, but there are a lot of human
lives. and one human life or two dozen--"


running, the skirts she did not like to wear lifted almost to her knees, her legs beneath it
running as boys run just as she rode like men ride.

university and in another two weeks i would ride back to oxford for the final year and my
degree. it was just last summer, last august, and father had just beat redmond for the
state legislature. the railroad was finished now and the partnership between father and
redmond had been dissolved so long ago that most people would have forgotten they
were ever partners if it hadn't been for the enmity between them. there had been a third
partner but nobody hardly remembered his name now; he and his name both had
vanished in the fury of the conflict which set up between father and redmond almost
before they began to lay the rails, between father's violent and ruthless dictatorialness
and will to dominate (the idea was his; he did think of the railroad first and then took
redmond in) and that quality in redmond (as george wyatt said, he was not a coward or
father would never have teamed with him) which permitted him to stand as much as he
did from father, to bear and bear and bear until something (not his will nor his courage)
broke in him. during the war redmond had not been a soldier, he had had something to
do with cotton for the government; he could have made money himself out of it but he
had not and everybody knew he had not, father knew it, yet father would even taunt him
with not having smelled powder. he was wrong; he knew he was when it was too late for
him to stop just as a drunkard reaches a point where it is too late for him to stop, where he
promises himself that he will and maybe believes he will or can but it is too late. finally they

"are not worth anything?"
"no. not anything--listen. i hear jupiter. i'll beat you to the house." she was already

i was twenty then. but the next time i was twenty-four; i had been three years at the

reached the point (they had both put everything they could mortgage or borrow into it for
father to ride up and down the line, paying the workmen and the waybills on the rails at
the last possible instant) where even father realised that one of them would have to get
out. so (they were not speaking then; it was arranged by judge benbow) they met and
agreed to buy or sell, naming a price which, in reference to what they had put into it, was
ridiculously low but which each believed the other could not raise--at least father claimed
that redmond did not believe he could raise it. so redmond accepted the price, and
found out that father had the money. and according to father, that's what started it,
although uncle buck mccaslin said father could not have owned a half interest in even
one hog, let alone a railroad, and not dissolve the business either sworn enemy or death-
pledged friend to his recent partner. so they parted and father finished the road. by that
time, seeing that he was going to finish it, some northern people sold him a locomotive on
credit which he named for aunt jenny, with a silver oil can in the cab with her name
engraved on it; and last summer the first train ran into jefferson, the engine decorated
with flowers and father in the cab blowing blast after blast on the whistle when he passed
redmond's house; and there were speeches at the station, with more flowers and a
confederate flag and girls in white dresses and red sashes and a band, and father stood
on the pilot of the engine and made a direct and absolutely needless allusion to mr.
redmond. that was it. he wouldn't let him alone. george wyatt came to me right
afterward and told me. "right or wrong," he said, "us boys and most of the other folks in this
county know john's right. but he ought to let redmond alone. i know what's wrong: he's
had to kill too many folks, and that's bad for a man. we all know colonel's brave as a lion,
but redmond ain't no coward either and there ain't any use in making a brave man that
made one mistake eat crow all the time. can't you talk to him?"

and he would have listened, but he could not have heard me because he had stepped
straight from the pilot of that engine into the race for the legislature. maybe he knew that
redmond would have to oppose him to save his face even though he (redmond) must
have known that, after that train ran into jefferson, he had no chance against father, or
maybe redmond had already announced his candidacy and father entered the race
just because of that, i don't remember. anyway they ran, a bitter contest in which father
continued to badger redmond without reason or need, since they both knew it would be
a landslide for father. and it was, and we thought he was satisfied. maybe he thought so
himself, as the drunkard believes that he is done with drink; and it was that afternoon and
drusilla and i walked in the garden in the twilight and i said something about what george
wyatt had told me and she released my arm and turned me to face her and said, "this
from you? you? have you forgotten grumby?"

worse things than killing men, bayard. there are worse things than being killed. sometimes i
think the finest thing that can happen to a man is to love something, a woman preferably,
well, hard hard hard, then to die young because he believed what he could not help but
believe and was what he could not (could not? would not) help but be." now she was
looking at me in a way she never had before. i did not know what it meant then and was
not to know until tonight since neither of us knew then that two months later father would
be dead. i just knew that she was looking at me as she never had before and that the
scent of the verbena in her hair seemed to have increased a hundred times, to have got a
hundred times stronger, to be everywhere in the dusk in which something was about to
happen which i had never dreamed of. then she spoke. "kiss me, bayard." "no. you are
father's wife."

"i don't know," i said. "i'll try." but i had no chance. that is, i could have talked to him

"no," i said. "i never will forget him." "you never will. i wouldn't let you. there are

"and eight years older than you are. and your fourth cousin too. and i have black

i intended to. i went to the house and into the office at once; i went to the center


hair. kiss me, bayard."

"no."

"kiss me, bayard." so i leaned my face down to her. but she didn't move, standing
so, bent lightly back from me from the waist, looking at me; now it was she who said, "no."
so i put my arms around her. then she came to me, melted as women will and can, the
arms with the wrist-and elbow-power to control horses about my shoulders, using the wrists
to hold my face to hers until there was no longer need for the wrists; i thought then of the
woman of thirty, the symbol of the ancient and eternal snake and of the men who have
written of her, and i realised then the immitigable chasm between all life and all print--that
those who can, do, those who cannot and suffer enough because they can't, write about
it. then i was free, i could see her again, i saw her still watching me with that dark
inscrutable look, looking up at me now across her down-slanted face; i watched her arms
rise with almost the exact gesture with which she had put them around me as if she were
repeating the empty and formal gesture of all promise so that i should never forget it, the
elbows angling outward as she put her hands to the sprig of verbena in her hair, i standing
straight and rigid facing the slightly bent head, the short jagged hair, the rigid curiously
formal angle of the bare arms gleaming faintly in the last of light as she removed the
verbena sprig and put it into my lapel, and i thought how the war had tried to stamp all
the women of her generation and class in the south into a type and how it had failed--the
suffering, the identical experience (hers and aunt jenny's had been almost the same
except that aunt jenny had spent a few nights with her husband before they brought him
back home in an ammunition wagon while gavin breckbridge was just drusilla's fiance)
was there in the eyes, yet beyond that was the incorrigibly individual woman: not like so
many men who return from wars to live on government reservations like so many steers,
emasculate and empty of all save an identical experience which they cannot forget and
dare not, else they would cease to live at that moment, almost interchangeable save for
the old habit of answering to a given name.


no. twice, a thousand times and never like--the eternal and symbolic thirty to a young
man, a youth, each time both cumulative and retroactive, immitigably unrepetitive, each
wherein remembering excludes experience, each wherein experience antedates
remembering the skill without weariness, the knowledge virginal to surfeit, the cunning
secret muscles to guide and control just as within the wrists and elbows lay slumbering the
mastery of horses: she stood back, already turning, not looking at me when she spoke,
never having looked at me, already moving swiftly on in the dusk: "tell john. tell him
tonight."

of the rug before the cold hearth, i don't know why, and stood there rigid like soldiers
stand, looking at eye level straight across the room and above his head and said "father"
and then stopped. because he did not even hear me. he said, "yes, bayard?" but he did
not hear me although he was sitting behind the desk doing nothing, immobile, as still as i
was rigid, one hand on the desk with a dead cigar in it, a bottle of brandy and a filled and
untasted glass beside his hand, clothed quiet and bemused in whatever triumph it was he
felt since the last overwhelming return of votes had come in late in the afternoon. so i
waited until after supper. we went to the diningroom and stood side by side until aunt
jenny entered and then drusilla, in the yellow ball gown, who walked straight to me and

"now i must tell father," i said.
"yes," she said. "you must tell him. kiss me." so again it was like it had been before.

gave me one fierce inscrutable look then went to her place and waited for me to draw
her chair while father drew aunt jenny's. he had roused by then, not to talk himself but
rather to sit at the head of the table and reply to drusilla as she talked with a sort of
feverish and glittering volubility--to reply now and then to her with that courteous intolerant
pride which had lately become a little forensic, as if merely being in a political contest
filled with fierce and empty oratory had retroactively made a lawyer of him who was
anything and everything except a lawyer. then drusilla and aunt jenny rose and left us
and he said, "wait" to me who had made no move to follow and directed joby to bring
one of the bottles of wine which he had fetched back from new orleans when he went
there last to borrow money to liquidate his first private railroad bonds. then i stood again
like soldiers stand, gazing at eye level above his head while he sat half-turned from the
table, a little paunchy now though not much, a little grizzled too in the hair though his
beard was as strong as ever, with that spurious forensic air of lawyers and the intolerant
eyes which in the last two years had acquired that transparent film which the eyes of
carnivorous animals have and from behind which they look at a world which no ruminant
ever sees, perhaps dares to see, which i have seen before on the eyes of men who have
killed too much, who have killed so much that never again as long as they live will they
ever be alone. i said again, "father," then i told him.

"hah?" he said. "sit down." i sat down, i looked at him, watched him fill both glasses
and this time i knew it was worse with him than not hearing: it didn't even matter. "you are
doing well in the law, judge wilkins tells me. i am pleased to hear that. i have not needed
you in my affairs so far, but from now on i shall. i have now accomplished the active
portion of my aims in which you could not have helped me; i acted as the land and the
time demanded and you were too young for that, i wished to shield you. but now the land
and the time too are changing; what will follow will be a matter of consolidation, of
pettifogging and doubtless chicanery in which i would be a babe in arms but in which
you, trained in the law, can hold your own--our own. yes, i have accomplished my aim,
and now i shall do a little moral house-cleaning. i am tired of killing men, no matter what
the necessity nor the end. tomorrow, when i go to town and meet ben redmond, i shall be
unarmed."


3

we reached home just before midnight; we didn't have to pass through jefferson either.
before we turned in the gates i could see the lights, the chandeliers--hall, parlor, and what
aunt jenny (without any effort or perhaps even design on her part) had taught even ringo
to call the drawing room, the light falling outward across the portico, past the columns.
then i saw the horses, the faint shine of leather and buckle-glints on the black silhouettes
and then the men too--wyatt and others of father's old troop--and i had forgot that they
would be there. i had forgot that they would be there; i remember how i thought, since i
was tired and spent with strain, now it will have to begin tonight. i won't even have until
tomorrow in which to begin to resist. they had a watchman, a picquet out, i suppose,
because they seemed to know at once that we were in the drive. wyatt met me, i halted
the mare, i could look down at him and at the others gathered a few yards behind him
with that curious vulture-like formality which southern men assume in such situations. "well,
boy," george said.

"i reckon i can attend to it," i said.
"sure," he said; there was no surprise, nothing at all in his voice because he had

"was it--" i said. "was he--"


"'it was all right. it was in front. redmond ain't no coward. john had the derringer
inside his cuff like always, but he never touched it, never made a move toward it." i have
seen him do it, he showed me once: the pistol (it was not four inches long) held flat inside
his left wrist by a clip he made himself of wire and an old clock spring; he would raise both
hands at the same time, cross them, fire the pistol from beneath his left hand almost as if
he were hiding from his own vision what he was doing; when he killed one of the men he
shot a hole through his own coat sleeve. "but you want to get on to the house," wyatt said.
he began to stand aside, then he spoke again: "we'll take this off your hands, any of us.
me." i hadn't moved the mare yet and i had made no move to speak, yet he continued
quickly, as if he had already rehearsed all this, his speech and mine, and knew what i
would say and only spoke himself as he would have removed his hat on entering a house
or used 'sir' in conversing with a stranger: "you're young, just a boy, you ain't had any
experience in this kind of thing. besides, you got them two ladies in the house to think
about. he would understand, all right."


already rehearsed this: "i reckon we all knew that's what you would say." he stepped back
then; almost it was as though he and not i bade the mare to move on. but they all
followed, still with that unctuous and voracious formality. then i saw drusilla standing at the
top of the front steps, in the light from the open door and the windows like a theatre
scene, in the yellow ball gown and even from here i believed that i could smell the
verbena in her hair, standing there motionless yet emanating something louder than the
two shots must have been--something voracious too and passionate. then, although i had
dismounted and someone had taken the mare, i seemed to be still in the saddle and to
watch myself enter that scene which she had postulated like another actor while in the
background for chorus. wyatt and the others stood with the unctuous formality which the
southern man shows in the presence of death--that roman holiday engendered by mist-
born protestantism grafted onto this land of violent sun, of violent alteration from snow to
heat-stroke which has produced a race impervious to both. i mounted the steps toward
the figure straight and yellow and immobile as a candle which moved only to extend one
hand; we stood together and looked down at them where they stood clumped, the
horses too gathered in a tight group beyond them at the rim of light from the brilliant door
and windows. one of them stamped and blew his breath and jangled his gear.

"thank you, gentlemen," i said. "my aunt and my--drusilla thank you. there's no need
for you to stay. goodnight." they murmured, turning. george wyatt paused, looking back
at me.


ground, the quiet and resilient earth, as though anyone in that house awake would try to
sleep, anyone already asleep in it whom they could have wakened. then they were gone
and drusilla and i turned and crossed the portico, her hand lying light on my wrist yet
discharging into me with a shock like electricity that dark and passionate voracity, the
face at my shoulder--the jagged hair with a verbena sprig above each ear, the eyes
staring at me with that fierce exaltation. we entered the hall and crossed it, her hand
guiding me without pressure, and entered the parlor. then for the first time i realised it--the
alteration which is death--not that he was now just clay but that he was lying down. but i

"tomorrow?" he said.
"tomorrow." then they went on, carrying their hats and tiptoeing, even on the

"hadn't you better go to bed now?" aunt jenny said.
"yes," drusilla said in that silvery ecstatic voice. "oh yes. there will be plenty of time

didn't look at him yet because i knew that when i did i would begin to pant; i went to aunt
jenny who had just risen from a chair behind which louvinia stood. she was father's sister,
taller than drusilla but no older, whose husband had been killed at the very beginning of
the war, by a shell from a federal frigate at fort moultrie, come to us from carolina six
years ago. ringo and i went to tennessee junction in the wagon to meet her. it was
january, cold and clear and with ice in the ruts; we returned just before dark with aunt
jenny on the seat beside me holding a lace parasol and ringo in the wagon bed nursing
a hamper basket containing two bottles of old sherry and the two jasmine cuttings which
were bushes in the garden now, and the panes of colored glass which she had salvaged
from the carolina house where she and father and uncle bayard were born and which
father had set in a fanlight about one of the drawing room windows for her--who came up
the drive and father (home now from the railroad) went down the steps and lifted her
from the wagon and said, "well, jenny," and she said, "well, johnny," and began to cry.
she stood too, looking at me as i approached--the same hair, the same high nose, the
same eyes as father's except that they were intent and very wise instead of intolerant. she
said nothing at all, she just kissed me, her hands light on my shoulders. then drusilla spoke,
as if she had been waiting with a sort of dreadful patience for the empty ceremony to be
done, in a voice like a bell: clear, unsentient, on a single pitch, silvery and triumphant:
"come, bayard."


for sleep." i followed her, her hand again guiding me without pressure; now i looked at him.
it was just as i had imagined it--sabre, plumes, and all--but with that alteration, that
irrevocable difference which i had known to expect yet had not realised, as you can put
food into your stomach which for a while the stomach declines to assimilate--the illimitable
grief and regret as i looked down at the face which i knew--the nose, the hair, the eyelids
closed over the intolerance--the face which i realised i now saw in repose for the first time
in my life; the empty hands still now beneath the invisible stain of what had been (once,
surely) needless blood, the hands now appearing clumsy in their very inertness, too clumsy
to have performed the fatal actions which forever afterward he must have waked and
slept with and maybe was glad to lay down at last--those curious appendages clumsily
conceived to begin with yet with which man has taught himself to do so much, so much
more than they were intended to do or could be forgiven for doing, which had now
surrendered that life to which his intolerant heart had fiercely held; and then i knew that in
a minute i would begin to pant. so drusilla must have spoken twice before i heard her and
turned and saw in the instant aunt jenny and louvinia watching us, hearing drusilla now,
the unsentient bell quality gone now, her voice whispering into that quiet death-filled room
with a passionate and dying fall: "bayard." she faced me, she was quite near; again the
scent of the verbena in her hair seemed to have increased a hundred times as she stood
holding out to me, one in either hand, the two duelling pistols. "take them, bayard," she
said, in the same tone in which she had said "kiss me" last summer, already pressing them
into my hands, watching me with that passionate and voracious exaltation, speaking in a
voice fainting and passionate with promise: "take them. i have kept them for you. i give
them to you. oh you will thank me, you will remember me who put into your hands what
they say is an attribute only of god's, who took what belongs to heaven and gave it to
you. do you feel them? the long true barrels true as justice, the triggers (you have fired
them) quick as retribution, the two of them slender and invincible and fatal as the physical
shape of love?" again i watched her arms angle out and upward as she removed the two
verbena sprigs from her hair in two motions faster than the eye could follow, already

putting one of them into my lapel and crushing the other in her other hand while she still
spoke in that rapid passionate voice not much louder than a whisper: "there. one i give to
you to wear tomorrow (it will not fade), the other i cast away, like this--" dropping the
crushed bloom at her feet. "i abjure it. i abjure verbena forever more; i have smelled it
above the odor of courage; that was all i wanted. now let me look at you." she stood
back, staring at me--the face tearless and exalted, the feverish eyes brilliant and
voracious. "how beautiful you are: do you know it? how beautiful: young, to be permitted
to kill, to be permitted vengeance, to take into your bare hands the fire of heaven that
cast down lucifer. no; i. i give it to you; i put it into your hands. oh you will thank me, you
will remember me when i am dead and you are an old man saying to himself, 'i have
tasted all things.'--it will be the right hand, won't it?" she moved; she had taken my right
hand which still held one of the pistols before i knew what she was about to do; she had
bent and kissed it before i comprehended why she took it. then she stopped dead still, still
stooping in that attitude of fierce exultant humility, her hot lips and her hot hands still
touching my flesh, light on my flesh as dead leaves yet communicating to it that battery
charge dark, passionate and damned forever of all peace. because they are wise,
women are--a touch, lips or fingers, and the knowledge, even clairvoyance, goes straight
to the heart without bothering the laggard brain at all. she stood erect now, staring at me
with intolerable and amazed incredulity which occupied her face alone for a whole
minute while her eyes were completely empty; it seemed to me that i stood there for a full
minute while aunt jenny and louvinia watched us, waiting for her eyes to fill. there was no
blood in her face at all, her mouth open a little and pale as one of those rubber rings
women seal fruit jars with. then her eyes filled with an expression of bitter and passionate
betrayal. "why, he's not--" she said. "he's not--and i kissed his hand," she said in an aghast
whisper; "i kissed his hand!" beginning to laugh, the laughter, rising, becoming a scream yet
still remaining laughter, screaming with laughter, trying herself to deaden the sound by
putting her hand over her mouth, the laughter spilling between her fingers like vomit, the
incredulous betrayed eyes still watching me across the hand.

and drusilla turned her face to louvinia.
"i kissed his hand, louvinia!" she cried. "did you see it? i kissed his hand!" the laughter

rising again, becoming the scream again yet still remaining laughter, she still trying to hold
it back with her hand like a small child who has filled its mouth too full.

"take her upstairs," aunt jenny said. but they were already moving toward the door,
louvinia half-carrying drusilla, the laughter diminishing as they neared the door as though
it waited for the larger space of the empty and brilliant hall to rise again. then it was gone;
aunt jenny and i stood there and i knew soon that i would begin to pant. i could feel it
beginning like you feel regurgitation beginning, as though there were not enough air in the
room, the house, not enough air anywhere under the heavy hot low sky where the equinox
couldn't seem to accomplish, nothing in the air for breathing, for the lungs. now it was
aunt jenny who said "bayard" twice before i heard her. "you are not going to try to kill him.
all right."


be him, bayard, because he's dead now. and don't let it be george wyatt and those
others who will be waiting for you tomorrow morning. i know you are not afraid."

"all right?" i said.
"yes. all right. don't let it be drusilla, a poor hysterical young woman. and don't let it

"louvinia!" aunt jenny said. they both came to her. louvinia touched and held her

"then it's not just drusilla? not just him? not just george wyatt and jefferson?" "no," i

"will you promise to let me see you before you go to town tomorrow?" i looked at

"but what good will that do?" i said. "what good will that do?" it almost began then;


i stopped it just in time. "i must live with myself, you see."

said.

her; we looked at one another for a moment. then she put her hands on my shoulders and
kissed me and released me, all in one motion. "goodnight, son," she said. then she was
gone too and now it could begin. i knew that in a minute i would look at him and it would
begin and i did look at him, feeling the long-held breath, the hiatus before it started,
thinking how maybe i should have said, "goodbye, father" but did not. instead i crossed to
the piano and laid the pistols carefully on it, still keeping the panting from getting too loud
too soon. then i was outside on the porch and (i don't know how long it had been) i
looked in the window and saw simon squatting on a stool beside him. simon had been his
body servant during the war and when they came home simon had a uniform too--a
confederate private's coat with a yankee brigadier's star on it and he had put it on now
too, like they had dressed father, squatting on the stool beside him, not crying, not
weeping the facile tears which are the white man's futile trait and which negroes know
nothing about but just sitting there, motionless, his lower lip slacked down a little; he raised
his hand and touched the coffin, the black hand rigid and fragile-looking as a clutch of
dead twigs, then dropped the hand; once he turned his head and i saw his eyes roll red
and unwinking in his skull like those of a cornered fox. it had begun by that time; i panted,
standing there, and this was it--the regret and grief, the despair out of which the tragic
mute insensitive bones stand up that can bear anything, anything.


4

after a while the whippoorwills stopped and i heard the first day bird, a mockingbird. it
had sung all night too but now it was the day song, no longer the drowsy moony fluting.
then they all began--the sparrows from the stable, the thrush that lived in aunt jenny's
garden, and i heard a quail too from the pasture and now there was light in the room. but i
didn't move at once. i still lay on the bed (i hadn't undressed) with my hands under my
head and the scent of drusilla's verbena faint from where my coat lay on a chair,
watching the light grow, watching it turn rosy with the sun. after a while i heard louvinia
come up across the back yard and go into the kitchen; i heard the door and then the
long crash of her armful of stovewood into the box. soon they would begin to arrive--the
carriages and buggies in the drive--but not for a while yet because they too would wait
first to see what i was going to do. so the house was quiet when i went down to the
diningroom, no sound in it except simon snoring in the parlor, probably still sitting on the
stool though i didn't look in to see. instead i stood at the diningroom window and drank
the coffee which louvinia brought me, then i went to the stable; i saw joby watching me
from the kitchen door as i crossed the yard and in the stable loosh looked up at me across
betsy's head, a curry comb in his hand, though ringo didn't look at me at all. we curried
jupiter then. i didn't know if we would be able to without trouble or not, since always
father would come in first and touch him and tell him to stand and he would stand like a
marble horse (or pale bronze rather) while loosh curried him. but he stood for me too, a

"yes." i looked at her. yes, thank god, without pity. "you see, i want to be thought

little restive but he stood, then that was done and now it was almost nine o'clock and soon
they would begin to arrive and i told ringo to bring betsy on to the house.

but it was there, waiting, a part of the alteration, as though by being dead and no longer
needing air he had taken all of it, all that he had compassed and claimed and postulated
between the walls which he had built, along with him. aunt jenny must have been
waiting; she came out of the diningroom at once, without a sound, dressed, the hair that
was like father's combed and smooth above the eyes that were different from father's
eyes because they were not intolerant but just intent and grave and (she was wise too)
without pity. "are you going now?" she said.

well of."
"i do," she said. "even if you spend the day hidden in the stable loft, i still do."

"maybe if she knew that i was going. was going to town anyway."


"no," she said. "no, bayard." we looked at one another. then she said quietly, "all
right. she's awake." so i mounted the stairs. i mounted steadily, not fast because if i had
gone fast the panting would have started again or i might have had to slow for a second
at the turn or at the top and i would not have gone on. so i went slowly and steadily,
across the hall to her door and knocked and opened it. she was sitting at the window, in
something soft and loose for morning in her bedroom only she never did look like morning
in a bedroom because here was no hair to fall about her shoulders. she looked up, she sat
there looking at me with her feverish brilliant eyes and i remembered i still had the verbena
sprig in my lapel and suddenly she began to laugh again. it seemed to come not from her
mouth but to burst out all over her face like sweat does and with a dreadful and painful
convulsion as when you have vomited until it hurts you yet still you must vomit again--burst
out all over her face except her eyes, the brilliant incredulous eyes looking at me out of the
laughter as if they belonged to somebody else, as if they were two inert fragments of tar or
coal lying on the bottom of a receptacle filled with turmoil: "i kissed his hand! i kissed his
hand!" louvinia entered, aunt jenny must have sent her directly after me; again i walked
slowly and steadily so it would not start yet, down the stairs where aunt jenny stood
beneath the chandelier in the hall as mrs. wilkins had stood yesterday at the university. she
had my hat in her hand. "even if you hid all day in the stable, bayard," she said. i took the
hat; she said quietly, pleasantly, as if she were talking to a stranger, a guest: "i used to see
a lot of blockade runners in charleston. they were heroes in a way, you see--not heroes
because they were helping to prolong the confederacy but heroes in the sense that
david crockett or john sevier would have been to small boys or fool young women. there
was one of them, an englishman. he had no business there; it was the money of course, as
with all of them. but he was the davy crockett to us because by that time we had all
forgot what money was, what you could do with it. he must have been a gentleman once
or associated with gentlemen before he changed his name, and he had a vocabulary of
seven words, though i must admit he got along quite well with them. the first four were, 'i'll
have rum, thanks,' and then, when he had the rum, he would use the other three--across
the champagne, to whatever ruffled bosom or low gown: 'no bloody moon.' no bloody
moon, bayard."

face sullen, downcast even while he handed me the reins. but he said nothing, nor did i
look back. and sure enough i was just in time; i passed the compson carriage at the

i went on to the house and into the hall. i had not had to pant in some time now

ringo was waiting with betsy at the front steps. again he did not look at me, his

"no you ain't," i said.
"yes i am."
"no you ain't." so i walked on, along the street in the hot sun. it was almost noon

gates, general compson lifted his hat as i did mine as we passed. it was four miles to town
but i had not gone two of them when i heard the horse coming up behind me and i did
not look back because i knew it was ringo. i did not look back; he came up on one of the
carriage horses, he rode up beside me and looked me full in the face for one moment, the
sullen determined face, the eyes rolling at me defiant and momentary and red; we rode
on. now we were in town--the long shady street leading to the square, the new
courthouse at the end of it; it was eleven o'clock now: long past breakfast and not yet
noon so there were only women on the street, not to recognise me perhaps or at least not
the walking stopped sudden and dead in midwalking as if the legs contained the sudden
eyes, the caught breath, that not to begin until we reached the square and i thinking if i
could only be invisible until i reach the stairs to his office and begin to mount. but i could
not, i was not; we rode up to the holston house and i saw the row of feet along the gallery
rail come suddenly and quietly down and i did not look at them, i stopped betsy and
waited until ringo was down then i dismounted and gave him the reins. "wait for me here,"
i said.

eyes and spoke quietly to one another like two conspirators. then i saw the pistol, the
outline of it inside his shirt, probably the one we had taken from grumby that day we killed
him,



now and i could smell nothing except the verbena in my coat, as if it had gathered all the
sun, all the suspended fierce heat in which the equinox could not seem to occur and were
distilling it so that i moved in a cloud of verbena as i might have moved in a cloud of
smoke from a cigar. then george wyatt was beside me (i don't know where he came
from) and five or six others of father's old troop a few yards behind, george's hand on my
arm, drawing me into a doorway out of the avid eyes like caught breaths.



colonel ever handle one right; i never could. so you take this. i tried it this morning and i
know it's right. here." he was already fumbling the pistol into my pocket, then the same
thing seemed to happen to him that happened to drusilla last night when she kissed my
hand--something communicated by touch straight to the simple code by which he lived,
without going through the brain at all: so that he too stood suddenly back, the pistol in his
hand, staring at me with his pale outraged eyes and speaking in a whisper thin with fury:
"who are you? is your name sartoris? by god, if you don't kill him, i'm going to." now it was
not panting, it was a terrible desire to laugh, to laugh as drusilla had, and say, "that's what
drusilla said." but i didn't. i said, "i'm tending to this. you stay out of it. i don't need any help."
then his fierce eyes faded gradually, exactly as you turn a lamp down.

"well," he said, putting the pistol back into his pocket. "you'll have to excuse me,
son. i should have knowed you wouldn't do anything that would keep john from laying
quiet. we'll follow you and wait at the foot of the steps. and remember: he's a brave man,
but he's been sitting in that office by himself since yesterday morning waiting for you and
his nerves are on edge."

"i'm going with you," he said, not loud; we stood there under the still circumspect

"have you got that derringer?" george said.
"no," i said.
"good," george said. "they are tricky things to fool with. couldn't nobody but

"i'll remember," i said. "i don't need any help." i had started on when suddenly i said


it without having any warning that i was going to: "no bloody moon."

sun, they following though not close so that i never saw them again until afterward,
surrounded by the remote still eyes not following me yet either, just stopped where they
were before the stores and about the door to the courthouse, waiting. i walked steadily on
enclosed in the now fierce odor of the verbena sprig. then shadow fell upon me; i did not
pause, i looked once at the small faded sign nailed to the brick: b. j. redmond. atty at
law and began to mount the stairs, the wooden steps scuffed by the heavy bewildered
boots of countrymen approaching litigation and stained by tobacco spit, on down the
dun corridor to the door which bore the name again, b. j. redmond and knocked once
and opened it. he sat behind the desk, not much taller than father but thicker as a man
gets who spends most of his time sitting and listening to people, freshly shaven and with
fresh linen; a lawyer yet it was not a lawyer's face--a face much thinner than the body
would indicate, strained (and yes, tragic; i know that now) and exhausted beneath the
neat recent steady strokes of the razor, holding a pistol flat on the desk before him, loose
beneath his hand and aimed at nothing. there was no smell of drink, not even of tobacco
in the neat clean dingy room although i knew he smoked. i didn't pause. i walked steadily
toward him. it was not twenty feet from door to desk yet i seemed to walk in a dreamlike
state in which there was neither time nor distance, as though the mere act of walking was
no more intended to encompass space than was his sitting. we didn't speak. it was as if
we both knew what the passage of words would be and the futility of it; how he might
have said, "go out, bayard. go away, boy" and then, "draw then. i will allow you to draw"
and it would have been the same as if he had never said it. so we did not speak; i just
walked steadily toward him as the pistol rose from the desk. i watched it, i could see the
foreshortened slant of the barrel and i knew it would miss me though his hand did not
tremble. i walked toward him, toward the pistol in the rock-like hand, i heard no bullet.
maybe i didn't even hear the explosion though i remember the sudden orange bloom and
smoke as they appeared against his white shirt as they had appeared against grumby's
greasy confederate coat; i still watched that foreshortened slant of barrel which i knew
was not aimed at me and saw the second orange flash and smoke and heard no bullet
that time either. then i stopped; it was done then. i watched the pistol descend to the
desk in short jerks; i saw him release it and sit back, both hands on the desk, i looked at his
face and i knew too what it was to want air when there was nothing in the
circumambience for the lungs. he rose, shoved the chair back with a convulsive motion
and rose, with a queer ducking motion of his head; with his head still ducked aside and
one arm extended as though he couldn't see and the other hand resting on the desk as if
he couldn't stand alone, he turned and crossed to the wall and took his hat from the rack
and with his head still ducked aside and one hand extended he blundered along the wall
and passed me and reached the door and went through it. he was brave; no one denied
that. he walked down their stairs and out onto the street where george wyatt and the
other six of father's old troop waited and where the other men had begun to run now; he
walked through the middle of them with his hat on and his head up (they told me how
someone shouted at him: "have you killed that boy too?"), saying no word, staring straight
ahead and with his back to them, on to the station where the south-bound train was just in
and got on it with no baggage, nothing, and went away from jefferson and from
mississippi and never came back.

yet (it wasn't that long, of course) i still sat behind the desk as he had sat, the flat of the

"what?" he said. i didn't answer. i went on across the square itself now, in the hot

i heard their feet on the stairs then in the corridor then in the room, but for a while

"no," i said. "i'm hungry. i didn't eat any breakfast."
"i reckon not, if you got up this morning aiming to do what you did. come on. we'll

"no," i said. "no. not there."
"why not? you ain't done anything to be ashamed of. i wouldn't have done it that

we did not go fast. soon it was one, maybe after; the carriages and buggies would

"yes," i said. "i would do it again."
"be damned if i would.--you want to come home with me? we'll have time to eat

pistol still warm under my hand, my hand growing slowly numb between the pistol and my
forehead. then i raised my head; the little room was full of men. "my god!" george wyatt
cried. "you took the pistol away from him and then missed him, missed him twice?" then he
answered himself--that same rapport for violence which drusilla had and which in
george's case was actual character judgment: "no; wait. you walked in here without
even a pocket knife and let him miss you twice. my god in heaven." he turned, shouting:
"get to hell out of here! you, white, ride out to sartoris and tell his folks it's all over and he's
all right. ride!" so they departed, went away; presently only george was left, watching me
with that pale bleak stare which was speculative yet not at all ratiocinative. "well by god,"
he said. "--do you want a drink?"


go to the holston house."


way, myself. i'd a shot at him once, anyway. but that's your way or you wouldn't have
done it."


and then ride out there in time for the--" but i couldn't do that either.




the smell of powder smoke still lingered a little, still lay somewhere on the hot dead air
though invisible now, blinking a little with his fierce pale unintroverted eyes. "well by god,"
he said again. "maybe you're right, maybe there has been enough killing in your family
without--come on." we left the office. i waited at the foot of the stairs and soon ringo
came up with the horses. we crossed the square again. there were no feet on the holston
house railing now (it was twelve o'clock) but a group of men stood before the door who
raised their hats and i raised mine and ringo and i rode on.

begin to leave the square soon, so i turned from the road at the end of the pasture and i
sat the mare, trying to open the gate without dismounting, until ringo dismounted and
opened it. we crossed the pasture in the hard fierce sun; i could have seen the house now
but i didn't look. then we were in the shade, the close thick airless shade of the creek
bottom; the old rails still lay in the undergrowth where we had built the pen to hide the
yankee mules. presently i heard the water, then i could see the sunny glints. we
dismounted. i lay on my back, i thought: now it can begin again if it wants to. but it did
not. i went to sleep. i went to sleep almost before i had stopped thinking. i slept for almost
five hours and i didn't dream anything at all yet i waked myself up crying, crying too hard
to stop it. ringo was squatting beside me and the sun was gone though there was a bird
of some sort still singing somewhere and the whistle of the north-bound evening train
sounded and the short broken puffs of starting where it had evidently stopped at our flag

"no," i said. "i'm not hungry after all. i think i'll go home."
"don't you want to wait and ride out with me?"
"no. i'll go on."
"you don't want to stay here, anyway." he looked around the room again, where

there was still a good deal of light in the pasture, though the whippoorwills had

station. after a while i began to stop and ringo brought his hat full of water from the creek
but instead i went down to the water myself and bathed my face.

begun, and when we reached the house there was a mockingbird singing in the
magnolia, the night song now, the drowsy moony one, and again the moon like the rim
print of a heel in wet sand. there was just one light in the hall now and so it was all over
though i could still smell the flowers even above the verbena in my coat. i had not looked
at him again. i had started to before i left the house but i did not, i did not see him again
and all the pictures we had of him were bad ones because a picture could no more have
held him dead than the house could have kept his body. but i didn't need to see him
again because he was there, he would always be there; maybe what drusilla meant by his
dream was not something which he possessed but something which he had bequeathed
us which we could never forget, which would even assume the corporeal shape of him
whenever any of us, black or white, closed our eyes. i went into the house. there was no
light in the drawing room except the last of the afterglow which came through the western
window where aunt jenny's colored glass was; i was about to go on up stairs when i saw
her sitting there beside the window. she didn't call me and i didn't speak drusilla's name, i
just went to the door and stood there. "she's gone," aunt jenny said. "she took the evening
train. she has gone to montgomery, to dennison." denny had been married about a year
now; he was living in montgomery, reading law.

"i see," i said. "then she didn't--" but there wasn't any use in that either; jed white
must have got there before one o'clock and told them. and besides, aunt jenny didn't
answer. she could have lied to me but she didn't, she said, "come here." i went to her
chair. "kneel down. i can't see you."
"don't you want the lamp?"


"no. kneel down." so i knelt beside the chair. "so you had a perfectly splendid
saturday afternoon, didn't you? tell me about it." then she put her hands on my shoulders. i
watched them come up as though she were trying to stop them; i felt them on my
shoulders as if they had a separate life of their own and were trying to do something which
for my sake she was trying to restrain, prevent. then she gave up or she was not strong
enough because they came up and took my face between them, hard, and suddenly the
tears sprang and streamed down her face like drusilla's laughing had. "oh, damn you
sartorises!" she said. "damn you! damn you!"

louvinia laying the table for supper. so the stairs were lighted quite well. but the upper hall
was dark. i saw her open door (that unmistakable way in which an open door stands open
when nobody lives in the room any more) and i realised i had not believed that she was
really gone. so i didn't look into the room. i went on to mine and entered. and then for a
long moment i thought it was the verbena in my lapel which i still smelled. i thought that
until i had crossed the room and looked down at the pillow on which it lay--the single sprig
of it (without looking she would pinch off a half dozen of them and they would be all of a
size, almost all of a shape, as if a machine had stamped them out) filling the room, the
dusk, the evening with that odor which she said you could smell alone above the smell of
horses.

as i passed down the hall the light came up in the diningroom and i could hear


