


[CHARACTER]
[CHARACTER] is very much her father's daughter, and she begins
her play with the same swift decisiveness with which oedipus began
his. within the first fifty lines, she is planning to defy creon's
order and bury polynices. unlike her father, however, [CHARACTER] possesses
a remarkable ability to remember the past. whereas oedipus defies tiresias,
the prophet who has helped him so many times, and whereas he seems
almost to have forgotten his encounter with laius at the three-way
crossroads, [CHARACTER] begins her play by talking about the many griefs
that her father handed down to his children. because of her acute
awareness of her own history, [CHARACTER] is much more dangerous than
oedipus, especially to creon. aware of the kind of fate her family
has been allotted, [CHARACTER] feels she has nothing to lose. the thought
of death at creon's hands that so terrifies ismene does not even
faze [CHARACTER], who looks forward to the glory of dying for her brother.
yet even in her expression of this noble sentiment, we see the way
in which [CHARACTER] continues to be haunted by the perversion that
has destroyed her family. speaking about being killed for burying
polynices, she says that she will lie with the one she loves, loved
by him, and it is difficult not to hear at least the hint of sexual
overtones, as though the self-destructive impulses of the oedipus
family always tend toward the incestuous.
[CHARACTER] draws attention to the difference between divine
law and human law. more than any other character in the three plays, she
casts serious doubt on creon's authority. when she points out that
his edicts cannot override the will of the gods or the unshakable traditions
of men, she places creon's edict against polynices' burial in a
perspective that makes it seem shameful and ridiculous. creon sees
her words as merely a passionate, wild outburst, but he will ultimately
be swayed by the words of tiresias, which echo those of [CHARACTER].
it is important to note, however, that [CHARACTER]'s motivation for
burying polynices is more complicated than simply reverence for
the dead or for tradition. she says that she would never have taken
upon herself the responsibility of defying the edict for the sake of
a husband or children, for husbands and children can be replaced;
brothers, once the parents are dead, cannot. in [CHARACTER] we
see a woman so in need of familial connection that she is desperate
to maintain the connections she has even in death.
