


Oedipus
Oedipus is a man of swift action and great insight. At
the opening of Oedipus the King, we see that these
qualities make him an excellent ruler who anticipates his subjects'
needs. When the citizens of Thebes beg him to do something
about the plague, for example, Oedipus is one step ahead of them--he
has already sent Creon to the oracle at Delphi for advice. But later,
we see that Oedipus's habit of acting swiftly has a dangerous side.
When he tells the story of killing the band of travelers who attempted
to shove him off the three-way crossroads, Oedipus shows that he
has the capacity to behave rashly.

At the beginning of Oedipus the King, Oedipus
is hugely confident, and with good reason. He has saved Thebes from
the curse of the Sphinx and become king virtually overnight. He
proclaims his name proudly as though it were itself a healing charm:
"Here I am myself-- / you all know me, the world knows my fame: /
I am Oedipus" (7-9). By the end of this tragedy,
however, Oedipus's name will have become a curse, so much so that,
in Oedipus at Colonus, the Leader of the Chorus
is terrified even to hear it and cries: "You, you're that man?"
(238).
Oedipus's swiftness and confidence continue to
the very end of Oedipus the King. We see him interrogate
Creon, call for Tiresias, threaten to banish Tiresias and Creon,
call for the servant who escaped the attack on Laius, call for the
shepherd who brought him to Corinth, rush into the palace to stab
out his own eyes, and then demand to be exiled. He is constantly
in motion, seemingly trying to keep pace with his fate, even as
it goes well beyond his reach. In Oedipus at Colonus, however,
Oedipus seems to have begun to accept that much of his life is out
of his control. He spends most of his time sitting rather than acting. Most
poignant are lines 825-960, where Oedipus
gropes blindly and helplessly as Creon takes his children from him.
In order to get them back, Oedipus must rely wholly on Theseus.
Once he has given his trust to Theseus, Oedipus seems
ready to find peace. At Colonus, he has at last forged a bond with
someone, found a kind of home after many years of exile. The single
most significant action in Oedipus at Colonus is
Oedipus's deliberate move offstage to die. The final scene of the
play has the haste and drive of the beginning of Oedipus
the King, but this haste, for Oedipus at least, is toward
peace rather than horror.
