ne 

scene: courtyard of the royal palace at thebes. daybreak. 



enter antigone and ismene 

antigone: 

dear sister! dear ismene! how many evils 

our father, oedipus, bequeathed to us! 

and is there one of them— do you know of one 

that zeus has not showered down upon our heads? 

i have seen pain, dishonor, shame, and ruin, 

i have seen them all, in what we have endured. 

and now comes this new edict by the king 

proclaimed throughout the city. have you heard? 

do you not know, even yet, our friends are threatened? 

they are to meet the fate of enemies. 10 

ismene: 

our friends, antigone? no, i have heard 

nothing about them either good or bad. 

i have no news except that we two sisters 

lost our two brothers when they killed each other. 

i know the argive army fled last night, 

but what that means, or whether it makes my life 

harder or easier, i cannot tell. 

antigone: 

this i was sure of. so i brought you here 
beyond the palace gates to talk alone. 

ismene: 

what is the matter? i know you are deeply troubled. 20 

antigone: 

yes, for our brothers' fate. creon has given 

an honored burial to one, to the other 

only unburied shame. eteocles 

is laid in the earth with all the rites observed 

that give him his due honor with the dead. 

but the decree concerning polyneices 

published through thebes is that his wretched body 

shall lie unmourned, unwept, unsepulchered. 

sweet will he seem to the vultures when they find him, 

a welcome feast that they are eager for. 30 

this is the edict the good creon uttered 

for your observance and for mine— ves, mine. 

he is coming here himself to make it plain 

to those who have not heard. nor does he think it 



sophocles 

i •• little consequence, because whoever 
l > cs not obey is doomed to death by stoning. 
v'u \ mi can show you are worth) of vuur birth, 
or bring disgrace upon a noble house. 

inmi m 

\\ h.it (..in i ilu, antigone? as tilings are, 

what can 1 do that would be of any help? 40 

w rlgoni : 

\ <>u can decide it you will share my task. 

what do you mean? what are you planning to do? 

as ik. on i : 

1 intend to give him burial. will you help? 

ismi nk: 

to give him burial! against the law? 

\n lk.dnl : 

he is our brother. i will do my duty, 
yours too, perhaps. 1 never will be false. 
bmene: 

creon forbids it! you are too rash, too headstrong. 

antigone: 

he has no right to keep me from my own. 

ism en e: 

antigone! think! think how our father perished 

in scorn and hatred when his sins, that he 50 

himself discovered, drove him to strike blind 

his eyes by his own hand. think how his mother, 

his wife— both names were hers— ended her life 

shamefully hanging in a twisted noose. 

think of that dreadful day when our two brothers, 

our wretched brothers, fought and fell together, 

each slayer and each slain. and now we too, 

left all alone, think how in turn we perish, 

if, in defiance of the law, we brave 

the power of the commandment of a king. 60 

think antigone! we who are women 
should not contend with men; we who are weak 
are ruled by the stronger, so that we must obey 
in this and in matters that are yet more bitter. 
and so i pray the dead to pardon me 

if i obey our rulers, since i must. 

to be too bold in what we do is madness. 

antigone: 

1 will not urge vou. and i would not thank you 
for any help that you might care to give me. 

do what you please, but i will bury him, 70 

4 



antigone 

and if i die for that, i shall be happy. 
loved, i shall rest beside the one i loved. 
my crime is innocence, for i owe the dead 
longer allegiance than i owe the living. 
with the dead i lie forever. live, if you choose, 
dishonoring the laws the gods have hallowed. 
ismene: 

no, i dishonor nothing. but to challenge 
authority— i have not strength enough. 

antigone: 

then make that vour excuse. i will go heap 

the earth above the brother that i love. 80 

ismene: 

sister, sister! how i fear for you! 

antigone: 

no, not for me. set your own life in order. 
ismene: 

well then, at least, tell no one of your plan. 
keep it close hidden, as i too will keep it. 

antigone: 

oh! publish it! proclaim it to the world! 
then i will hate you less than for your silence. 

ismene: 

your heart is hot for deeds that chill the blood. 

antigone: 

1 know that i give pleasure where i should. 
ismene: 

yes, if you can, but you will try in vain. 

antigone: 

when my strength fails, then i shall try no longer. 90 

ismene: 

a hopeless task should never be attempted. 

antigone: 

your words have won their just reward: my hatred 
and the long-lasting hatred of the dead. 
but leave me and the folly that is mine 
to undergo the worst that can befall me. 
i shall not suffer an ignoble death. 

ismene: 

go then, antigone, if you must go. 

and yet remember, though your act is foolish, 

that those who love you do so with all their hearts. 

exeunt antigone and ismene. enter chorus 
chorus: 

sunbeam, eye of the golden dav, on thebes the seven-gated, 100 
on dirce's streams you have dawned at last, o fairest of light. 



bop ho cle! 

dawned on our foes, w ho had come enflamed by the quarrel of 
polj neices, 
shone on their guttering arms, made swifter their headlong flight. 
prom argos they came with their white shields flashing, 

1 heir helmets, crested with horsehair, agleam: 
an army that hem like a snow-white eagle 

across our borders with shrilling scream. 

above out roofs it soared, at our gares with greedy jaws it was gaping; 
but before their spears tasted our blood, and before our circle of 

towers 

felt the flame of their torches, thev turned to flight. the foes of the 
theban dragon no 

found the surge and clamor of battle too fierce for their feebler 
powers. 
for zeus, who abhors a proud tongue's boasting, 

seeing their river of armor flow 
clashing and golden, struck with his lightning 
to silence the shout of our foremost foe. 

he crashed to the earth with his torch, who had scaled the top of our 
ramparts, 
raging in frenzy against us, breathing tempestuous hate, 
raging and threatening in vain. and mighty ares, our ally, 

dealing havoc around him, apportioned to other foemen their fate. 
for at seven portals, their seven leaders, 120 

down to the earth their bronze arms threw 
in tribute to zeus, the lord of the battle; 

save the fated brothers, the wretched two, 
who went to their common doom together, 
each wielding a spear that the other slew. 

now glorious victory smiles upon jubilant thebes rich in chariots. 

let us give free rein to our joy, forgetting our late-felt war; 
let us visit in night-long chorus the temples of all the immortals, 
with bacchus, who shakes the land in the dances, going before. 
but behold! the son of monoeceus approaches, 130 

creon, the new-crowned king of the land, 
made king by new fortunes the gods have allotted. 
what step has he pondered? what has he planned 
to lav before us, his council of elders, 

who have gathered together at his command? 

enter creon 

creon : 

elders of thebes, our city has been tossed 



antigone 

by a tempestuous ocean, but the gods 

have steadied it once more and made it safe. 

you, out of all the citizens, i have summoned, 

because i knew that you once reverenced 140 

the sovereignty of laius, and that later, 

when oedipus was king and when he perished, 

your steadfast loyalty upheld his children. 

and now his sons have fallen, each one stained 

by his brother's blood, killed by his brother's hand, 

so that the sovereignty devolves on me, 

since i by birth am nearest to the dead. 

certainly no man can be fully known, 

known in his soul, his will, his intellect, 

until he is tested and has proved himself 150 

in statesmanship. because a city's ruler, 

instead of following the wisest counsel, 

may through some fear keep silent. such a man 

i think contemptible. and one whose friend 

has stronger claims upon him than his country, 

him i consider worthless. as for me, 

i swear by zeus, forever all-beholding, 

that i would not keep silence, if i saw 

ruin instead of safety drawing near us; 

nor would i think an enemy of the state 160 

could be my friend. for i remember this: 

our country bears us all securely onward, 

and only while it sails a steady course 

is friendship possible. such are the laws 

by which i guard the greatness of the city. 

and kindred to them is the proclamation 

that i have made to all the citizens 

concerning the two sons of oedipus: 

eteocles, who has fallen in our defence, 

bravest of warriors, shall be entombed 170 

with every honor, every offering given 

that may accompany the noble dead 

down to their rest. but as for polyneices, 

he came from exile eager to consume 

the city of his fathers with his fire 

and all the temples of his fathers' gods, 

eager to drink deep of his kindred's blood, 

eager to drag us off to slavery. 

to this man, therefore, nothing shall be given. 

none shall lament him, none shall do him honor. 180 

he shall be left without a grave, his corpse 

devoured by birds and dogs, a loathsome sight. 



iophoclbi 

such is 1 1 in- will. for never shall the wicked 

be raven more approval than the past, 
if i ha\ e p«>u cr to stop ir. hut whoever 
feels in ins heart affection tor his city 
shall be rewarded both in life and death. 
chorus: 

creon, son of menoeceus, it has pleased you 
so to pass judgment <>n our friend and foe. 

and you may gi v <-' commands to all of us, ioo 

the living and the dead. your will is law. 
creon : 

then see that this command is carried out. 

chorus: 

sir, lay that burden on some younger man. 

creon : 

sentries have been assigned to guard the body. 
chorus: 

then what additional duty would you give us? 

creon : 

never to countenance the disobedient. 
chorus: 

who is so stupid as to long for death? 



creon: 



death is indeed the punishment. yet men 
have often been destroyed by hope of gain. 



guard: 



guard 



enter guard 



my lord, i cannot say that i have hurried, 200 

or that my running has made me lose my breath. 

i often stopped to think, and turned to go back. 

i stood there talking to myself: 'you fool,' 

i said, 'why do you go to certain death?' 

and then: 'you idiot, are you still delaying? 

if someone else tells creon, you will suffer.' 

i changed my mind this way, getting here slowly, 

making a short road long. but still, at last, 

i did decide to come. and though mv story 

is nothing much to tell, yet i will tell it. 210 

one thing i know. i must endure my fate, 

but nothing more than that can happen to me. 

what is the matter? what is troubling you? 

please let me tell you first about myself. 



creon: 



guard: 



creon: 



creon: 



guard: 



antigone 

i did not do it. i did not see who did. 

it is not right for me to be punished for it. 

you take good care not to expose yourself. 
your news must certainly be something strange. 

yes, it is strange— dreadful. i cannot speak. 

oh, tell it, will you? tell it and go away! 220 

well, it is this. someone has buried the body, 
just now, and gone— has sprinkled it with dust 
and given it other honors it should have. 

what are you saying? who has dared to do it? 

i cannot tell. nothing was to be seen: 
no mark of pickaxe, no spot where a spade 
had turned the earth. the ground was hard and dry, 
unbroken— not a trace of any wheels- 
no sign to show who did it. when the sentry 
on the first watch discovered it and told us, 230 

we were struck dumb with fright. for he was hidden 
not by a tomb but a light coat of dust, 
as if a pious hand had scattered it. 
there were no tracks of any animal, 
a dog or wild beast that had come to tear him. 
we all began to quarrel, and since no one 
was there to stop us, nearly came to blows. 
everyone was accused, and everyone 
denied his guilt. we could discover nothing. 
we were quite willing to handle red-hot iron, 240 

to walk through fire, to swear by all the gods 
that we were innocent of the deed itself, 
and innocent of taking any part 
in planning it or doing it. at last 
one of us spoke. we trembled and hung our heads, 
for he was right; we could not argue with him, 
yet his advice was bound to cause us trouble. 
he told us all this had to be reported, 
not kept a secret. we all agreed to that. 

we drew lots for it, and i had no luck. 250 

i won the prize and was condemned to come. 
so here i stand, unwilling, because i know 
the bringer of bad news is never welcome. 



sophocles 

sir, as he spoke, i have been wondering. 
( an this be, possibly, the work of gods? 



c kfl'n 



guard: 



creon: 



be silent' before you madden me! you are old. 

would vou l>e senseless also? what you sav 

is unendurable. you sav the gods 

( ared for this corpse. then was it for reward, 

mighty to match his mighty services, 260 

that the gods covered him? 1 le \\ h<> came to burn 

their pillared temples and their votive offerings, 

ravage their land, and trample down the state. 

or is it your opinion that the gods 

honor the wicked? inconceivable! 

1 low ever, from the first, some citizens 

who found it difficult to endure this edict, 

muttered against me, shaking their heads in secret, 

instead of bowing down beneath the yoke, 

obedient and contented with my rule. 270 

these are the men who are responsible, 

for i am certain thev have bribed the guards 

to burv him. nothing is worse than money. 

money lavs waste to cities, banishes 

men from their homes, indoctrinates the heart, 

perverting honesty to works of shame, 

showing men how to practice villainy, 

subduing them to every godless deed. 

but all those men who got their pav for this 

need have no doubt their turn to pay will come. 280 

(to the guard) now, you. as i still honor zeus the king, 

i tell you, and i swear it solemnlv, 

either vou find the man who did this thing, 

the very man, and bring him here to me, 

or you will not just die. before you die. 

you will be tortured until you have explained 

this outrage; so that later when vou steal 

you will know better where to look for money 

and not expect to find it everywhere. 

ill-gotten wealth brings ruin and not safety. 290 

sir, may i speak? or shall i merely go? 

you can say nothing that is not offensive. 

do i offend your hearing or vour heart? 

is it your business to define the spot? 
10 



antigone 
guard: 

the criminal hurts your heart, and i your ears. 
creon: 

still talking? why, you must have been born talking! 
guard: 

perhaps. but i am not the guilty man. 
creon: 

you are. and what is more you sold yourself. 
guard: 

you have judged me, sir, and have misjudged me, too. 



creon: 



be clever about judging if you care to. 300 

but you will say that treachery leads to sorrow 
unless you find the man and show him to me. 

exit creon 



guard: 



finding him is the best thing that could happen. 
fate will decide. but however that may be, 
you never are going to see me here again. 
i have escaped! i could not have hoped for that. 
i owe the gods my thanks for guarding me. 

exit guard 
chorus: 

many the marvelous things; but none that can be 

more of a marvel than man! this being that braves 
with the south wind of winter the whitened streaks of the sea, 3 10 

threading his way through the troughs of engulfing waves. 
and the earth most ancient, the eldest of all the gods, 

earth, undecaying, unwearied, he wears away with his toil; 
forward and back with his plowshare, year after year, he plods, 
with his horses turning the soil. 

man in devising excels. the birds of the air, 

that light-minded race, he entangles fast in his toils. 
wild creatures he catches, casting about them his snare, 

and the salt-sea brood he nets in his woven coils. 
the tireless bull he has tamed, and the beast whose lair 320 

is hidden deep in the wilds, who roams in the wooded hills. 
he has fitted a yoke that the neck of the shaggy-maned horse 
will bear; 

he is master of all through his skills. 

he has taught himself speech, and wind-like thought, and the lore 
of ruling a town. he has fled the arrows of rain, 

the searching arrows of frost he need fear no more, 
that under a starry sky are endured with pain. 

11 



sophocles 

pro\ toon for -ill he has made -unpnn ided for naught, 
save death itsclt, that in days t" come will take shape. 

from obscure and deep seated disease he has subtl) wrought 330 
\ « .i\ ui escape. 

resourceful and skilled, w ith an inconceivable art, 

\ it follows his course to a good or an evil end. 
when lie holds the canons oi justice high in his heart 

aild has swum to the gods the law s ot" the land to defend, 
proud stands his city; without a city is he 

who w ith ugliness, rashness, or evil dishonors the day. 
let me shun his thoughts. let him share no hearthstone with me, 
who acts in this w ,i\ ! 

chorus: 

1 00k there' look there! what portent can this be? 340 

antigone! i know her, it is she! 
daughter of oedipus a prisoner brought? 
you defied creon? you in folly caught? 

enter guard with antigone 
guard: 

she did it. here she is. we caught this girl 

as she was burying him. where is the king? 
chorus: 

leaving the palace there, just as we need him. 



creon: 



guard: 



enter creon 

why do you need my presence? what has happened? 

my lord, no one should take a solemn oath 

not to do something, for his second thoughts 

make him a liar. i vowed not to hurrv back. 350 

i had been battered by vour storm of threats. 

but when a joy comes that exceeds our hopes, 

no other happiness can equal it. 

so i have broken my vow. i have returned, 

bringing this girl along. she was discovered 

busv with all the rites of burial. 

there was no casting lots, no, not this time! 

such luck as this was mine and no one else's. 

now sir, take her vourself, examine her. 

convict her, do what vou like. but as for me, 360 

1 have the right to a complete acquittal. 

12 



antigone 
creon: 

this is the girl you caught? how? where was she? 
guard: 

burying the dead man, just as i have told you. 

creon: 

do you mean that? or have you lost your mind? 
guard: 

your order was that he should not be buried. 
i saw her bury him. is that all clear? 



creon: 

guard: 



how was she seen? you caught her in the act? 



this was what happened. when we had gotten back, 
w 7 ith your threats following us, we swept away 
the dust that covered him. we left him bare, 370 

a rotting corpse. and then we sat to windward, 
up on the hillside, to avoid the stench. 
all of us were alert, and kept awake 
threatening each other. no one could get careless. 
so the time passed, until the blazing sun 
stood at the zenith, and the heat was burning. 
then suddenly the wind came in a blast, 
lifting a cloud of dust up from the earth, 
troubling the sky and choking the whole plain, 
stripping off all the foliage of the woods, 380 

filling the breadth of heaven. we closed our eyes 
and bore the affliction that the gods had sent us. 
when it had finally stopped, we saw this girl. 
she wailed aloud with a sharp, bitter cry, 
the cry a bird gives seeing its empty nest 
robbed of its brood. and she too, when she saw 
the naked body, was loud in her lament 
and cursed the men who had uncovered him. 
quickly she sprinkled him with dust, and then 
lifting a pitcher, poured out three libations 390 

to do him honor. when we ran and caught her, 
she was unterrified. when we accused her 
both of her earlier and her present act, 
she made no effort to deny the charges. 
i am part glad, part sorry. it is good 
to find that you yourself have gotten clear, 
but to bring trouble on your friends is hard. 
however, nothing counts except my safety. 
creon (to antigone) : 

you there. you, looking at the ground. tell me. 

do you admit this or deny it? which? 400 

13 



sophocles 
axtigon1 

\ es, 1 .nlmir ir. 1 do not deny it. 

( iu on ( to 1. 1 \kd): 

( i... you are free, 1 he charge is dropped. 

exit guard 



now you, 
answer this question. make your answer brief. 
i .iu knew there was a law forbidding this? 

anticom : 

of course 1 knew it. why nor? it was public. 

creon : 

and vim have dared to disobey the law? 

antigon1 

yes. lor this law was not proclaimed by zeus, 

or by the gods who rule the world below. 

i do not think your edicts have such power 

that they can override the laws of heaven, 410 

unwritten and unfailing, laws whose life 

belongs not to today or yesterday 

but to time everlasting; and no man 

knows the first moment that they had their being. 

if i transgressed these laws because i feared 

the arrogance of man, how to the gods 

could i make satisfaction? well i know, 

being a mortal, that i have to die, 

even without your proclamations. yet 

if i must die before my time is come, 420 

that is a blessing. because to one who lives, 

as i live, in the midst of sorrows, death 

is of necessity desirable. 

for me, to face death is a trifling pain 

that does not trouble me. but to have left 

the body of my brother, my own brother, 

lying unburied would be bitter grief. 

and if these acts of mine seem foolish to you, 

perhaps a fool accuses me of folly. 

chorus: 

the violent daughter of a violent father, 430 

she cannot bend before a storm of evils. 

creon (to antigone ): 

stubborn? self-willed? people like that, i tell you, 
are the first to come to grief. the hardest iron, 
baked in the fire, most quickly flies to pieces. 
an unruly horse is taught obedience 
by a touch of the curb. how can you be so proud? 

14 



antigone 

you, a mere slave? (to chorus) she was well schooled already 

in insolence, when she defied the law. 

and now look at her! boasting, insolent, 

exulting in what she did. and if she triumphs 

and goes unpunished, i am no man— she is. 440 

if she were more than niece, if she were closer 

than anyone who worships at my altar, 

she would not even then escape her doom, 

a dreadful death. nor would her sister. yes, 

her sister had a share in burying him. 

(to attendant) go bring her here. i have just seen her, raving, 

beside herself. even before they act, 

traitors who plot their treason in the dark 

betray themselves like that. detestable! 

(to antigone) but hateful also is an evil-doer 450 

who, caught red-handed, glorifies the crime. 

antigone: 

now you have caught me, will you do more than kill me? 
creon: 

no, only that. with that i am satisfied. 

antigone: 

then why do you delay? you have said nothing 

i do not hate. i pray you never will. 

and you hate what i say. yet how could i 

have won more splendid honor than by giving 

due burial to my brother? all men here 

would grant me their approval, if their lips 

were not sealed up in fear. but you, a king, 460 

blessed by good fortune in much else besides, 

can speak and act with perfect liberty. 

creon: 

all of these thebans disagree with you. 

antigone: 

no. they agree, but they control their tongues. 

creon: 

you feel no shame in acting without their help? 

antigone: 

i feel no shame in honoring a brother. 

creon: 

another brother died who fought against him. 

antigone: 

two brothers. the two sons of the same parents. 

creon: 

honor to one is outrage to the other. 

antigone: 

eteocles will not feel himself dishonored. 470 

15 



sophocles 

( kion 

\\ hat! when his rites are offered to a traitor? 
an nooni : 

it was his brother, not his slave, who died. 
( r] on: 

one w ho attacked the hind that he defended. 

an ik. oni : 

the gods still wish those rites to be performed. 
( ki on: 

are the just pleased with the unjust as their equals? 

an m..om : 

that may be virtuous in the world below. 

creon : 

no. even there a foe is never a friend. 

antigone: 

i am not made for hatred but for love. 

creon: 

then go down to the dead. if you must love, 

love them. while i yet live, no woman rules me. 480 

chorus: 

look there. ismene, weeping as sisters weep. 
the shadow of a cloud of grief lies deep 
on her face, darklv flushed; and in her pain 
her tears are falling like a flood of rain. 

enter ismene and attendants 
creon: 

you viper! lying hidden in my house, 
sucking my blood in secret, while i reared, 
unknow ingly, two subverters of mv throne. 
do you confess that you have taken part 
in this man's burial, or deny it? speak. 

ismene: 

if she will recognize mv right to say so, 490 

i shared the action and i share the blame. 
antigonk: 

no. that would not be just. i never let you 
take any part in what you disapproved of. 

ismene: 

in your calamity, i am not ashamed 

to stand beside you, beaten by this tempest. 

antigone: 

the dead are witnesses of what i did, 
to love in words alone is not enough. 

ismene: 

do not reject me. sister! let me die 
beside you, and do honor to the dead. 

16 



antigone 
antigone: 

no. you will neither share my death nor claim 500 

what i have done. my death will be sufficient. 
ismene: 

what happiness can i have when you are gone? 

antigone: 

ask creon that. he is the one you value. 
ismene: 

do you gain anything by taunting me? 

antigone: 

ah, no! by taunting you, i hurt myself. 
ismene: 

how can i help you? tell me what i can do. 

antigone: 

protect yourself. i do not grudge your safety. 
ismene: 

antigone! shall i not share your fate? 

antigone: 

we both have made our choices: life, and death. 
ismene: 

at least i tried to stop you. i protested. 510 

antigone: 

some have approved your way; and others, mine. 
ismene: 

yet now i share your guilt. i too am ruined. 
antigone: 

take courage. live your life. but i long since 

gave myself up to death to help the dead. 
creon: 

one of them has just lost her senses now. 

the other has been foolish all her life. 
ismene: 

we cannot always use our reason clearly. 

suffering confuses us and clouds our minds. 
creon: 

it clouds your mind. you join in her wrong-doing. 
ismene: 

how is life possible without my sister? 520 

creon: 

your sister? you have no sister. she is dead. 
ismene: 

then you will kill the wife your son has chosen? 

creon: 

yes. there are other fields that he can plow. 
ismene: 

he will not find such an enduring love. 

17 



sophocles 

\ wicked woman for my son? no, never! 

an ih.usl 

o i [aemon, 1 [aemon! 1 [o\» \ cur father wrongs vou! 

( km.s 

new and your marriage! let me hear no more! 
i horn s 

you are unyielding? you will take her from him? 

creon: 

death will act for me. death will stop the marriage, 
i iimrvs: 

it seems, then, you have sentenced her to death. 530 

creon : 

yes. and my sentence you yourselves accepted. 

take them inside. from now on, they are women, 

and have no liberty. for even the bold 

seek an escape when they see death approaching. 

exeunt antigonk, ismene, and attendants 

chorus: 

blessed the life that has no evil known, 

for the gods, striking, strike down a whole race- 
doomed parent and doomed child both overthrown. 

as when the fierce breath of the winds of thrace 
across the darkness of the sea has blown 

a rushing surge; black sand from deep below 540 

games boiling up; wind-beaten headlands moan, 

fronting the full shock of the billow's blow. 

the race of oedipus, from days of old, 
to long dead sorrows add new sorrows' weight. 

some god has sent them sufferings manifold. 
none may release another, for their fate 

through generations loosens not its hold. 
now is their last root cut, their last light fled, 

because of frenzy's curse, words overbold, 
and dust, the gods' due, on the bloodstained dead. 550 

o zeus, what human sin restricts thy might? 
thou art unsnared by all-ensnaring sleep 

or tireless months. unaging thou dost keep 
thy court in splendor of olympian light. 

and as this law was true when time began, 
tomorrow and forever it shall be: 

naught beyond measure in the life of man 
from fate goes free. 

18 



antigone 

for hope, wide-ranging, that brings good to some, 
to many is a false lure of desire 560 

lijjht-minded, giddy; and until the fire 
scorches their feet, they know not what will come. 

wise is the famous adage: that to one 
whom the gods madden, evil, soon or late, 

seems good; then can he but a moment shun 
the stroke of fate. 

but haemon comes, of your two sons the last. 
is his heart heavy for the sentence passed 

upon antigone, his promised bride, 
and for his hope of marriage now denied? 570 

enter haemon 
creon: 

we soon shall know better than seers could tell us. 

my son, antigone is condemned to death. 

nothing can change my sentence. have you learned 

her fate and come here in a storm of anger, 

or do you love me and support my acts? 
haemon: 

father, i am your son. your greater knowledge 

will trace the pathway that i mean to follow. 

my marriage cannot be of more importance 

than to be guided always by your wisdom. 



creon: 



yes, haemon, this should be the law vou live by! 580 

in all things to obey your father's will. 

men pray for children round them in their homes 

only to see them dutiful and quick 

with hatred to requite their father's foe, 

with honor to repav their father's friend. 

but what is there to say of one whose children 

prove to be valueless? that he has fathered 

grief for himself and laughter for his foes. 

then, haemon, do not, at the lure of pleasure, 

unseat your reason for a woman's sake. 500 

this comfort soon grows cold in your embrace: 

a wicked wife to share your bed and home. 

is there a deeper wound than to find worthless 

the one vou love? turn from this girl with loathing, 

as from an enemv, and let her go 

to get a husband in the world below. 

for i have found her openly rebellious, 

her only out of all the city. therefore, 

19 



sophocles 

1 w ill not break the oath that 1 have sworn. 

i will have her killed. vainly she will invoke 600 

the bond of kindred blood the gods make sacred. 

if 1 permit disloyalty to breed 

in my own house, 1 nurture it in strangers. 

lb- w ho is righteous w ith his kin is righteous 

in the state also. therefore, 1 cannot pardon 

one who does violence to the laws or thinks 

to dictate to his rulers; for whoe\ er 

may be the man appointed by the city, 

that man must be obeyed in e\ erything, 

little or great, just or unjust. and surely 610 

he who was thus obedient would be found 

as good a ruler as he was a subject; 

and in a storm of spears he would stand fast 

with loyal courage at his comrade's side. 

but disobedience is the worst of evils. 

for it is this that ruins cities; this 

.makes our homes desolate; armies of allies 

through this break up in rout. but most men find 

their happiness and safety in obedience. 

therefore we must support the law, and never 620 

be beaten by a woman. it is better 

to fall by a man's hand, if we must fall, 

than to be known as weaker than a girl. 
chorus: 

we may in our old age have lost our judgment, 

and yet to us you seem to have spoken wisely. 
haemon: 

the gods have given men the gift of reason, 

greatest of all things that we call our own. 

i have no skill, nor do i wish to have it, 

to show where you have spoken wrongly. yet 

some other's thought, beside your own, might prove 630 

to be of value. therefore it is my duty, 

my natural duty as your son, to notice, 

on your behalf, all that men say, or do. 

or find to blame. for your frown frightens them, 

so that the citizen dares not say a word 

that would offend you. i can hear, however, 

murmurs in darkness and laments for her. 

they say: 'no woman ever less deserved 

her doom, no woman ever was to die 

so shamefully for deeds so glorious. 640 

for when her brother fell in bloody battle, 

she would not let his body lie unburied 

20 



antigone 

to be devoured by carrion dogs or birds. 

does such a woman not deserve reward, 

reward of golden honor?' this i hear, 

a rumor spread in secrecy and darkness. 

father, i prize nothing in life so highly 

as your well-being. how can children have 

a nobler honor than their father's fame 

or father than his son's? then do not think 650 

your mood must never alter; do not feel 

your word, and yours alone, must be correct. 

for if a man believes that he is right 

and only he, that no one equals him 

in what he says or thinks, he will be found 

empty when searched and tested. because a man 

even if he be wise, feels no disgrace 

in learning many things, in taking care 

not to be over-rigid. you have seen 

trees on the margin of a stream in winter: 660 

those yielding to the flood save every twig, 

and those resisting perish root and branch. 

so, too, the mariner who never slackens 

his taut sheet overturns his craft and spends 

keel uppermost the last part of his voyage. 

let your resentment die. let yourself change. 

for i believe— if i, a younger man, 

may have a sound opinion— it is best 

that men by nature should be wise in all things. 

but most men find they cannot reach that goal; 670 

and when this happens, it is also good 

to learn to listen to wise counselors. 
chorus: 

sir, when his words are timely, you should heed them. 

and haemon, you should profit by his words. 

each one of you has spoken reasonably. 
creon: 

are men as old as i am to be taught 

how to behave by men as young as he? 
haemon: 

not to do wrong. if i am young, ignore 

my youth. consider only what i do. 
creon: 

have you done well in honoring the rebellious? 680 

haemon: 

those who do wrong should not command respect. 
creon: 

then that disease has not infected her? 

21 



sophocles 
baj mos 

all <>f our city with one voice denies ir. 

docs 1 hebes give orders tor the way 1 rule? 

ii u m.'n 

1 low young \ mi are! 1 low young in saying that! 

i ki os: 

am i to govern l>v another's judgment? 

h \1 \1t'\ 

a city that is one man's is no city. 

creon: 

a city is the king's. that much is sure. 

ii \l \ln\: 

you would rule well in a deserted country. 

creon : 

this boy defends a woman, it appears. 690 

h \i mon: 

if you are one. i am concerned for you. 

creon : 

to quarrel with your father does not shame you? 

ha em on: 

not when i see you failing to do justice. 

creon: 

am i unjust when i respect my crown? 

haemon: 

respect it! when you trample down religion? 

creon: 

infamous! giving first place to a woman! 

haemon: 

but never to anything that would disgrace me. 

creon: 

each word you utter is a plea for her. 

haemon: 

for you, too, and for me, and for the gods. 

creon : 

you shall not marry her this side of death. 700 

haemon: 

then if she dies, she does not die alone. 

creon: 

what! has it come to this? you threaten me? 

haemon: 

no. but i tell you your decree is useless. 

creon : 

you will repent this. you! teaching me wisdom! 

haemon: 

i will not call you mad. you are my father. 
22 



antigone 
creon: 

you woman's slave! your talk will not persuade me. 

haemon: 

then what you want is to make all the speeches. 
creon: 

so. now by all the gods in heaven above us, 

one thing is certain: you are going to pay 

for taunting and insulting me. {to attendants) bring out 710 

that hated object. let her die this moment, 

here, at her bridegroom's feet, before his eyes. 

haemon: 

no, you are wrong. not at my feet. and never 

will you set eyes upon my face again. 

rage, rave, with anyone who can bear to listen. 

exit haemon 
chorus: 

sir, he is gone; his anger gives him speed. 
young men are bitter in their agony. 

creon: 

let him imagine more than man can do, 
or let him do more. never shall he save 

these two girls; they are going to their doom. 720 

chorus: 

do you intend to put them both to death? 

creon: 

that was well said. no, not the innocent. 
chorus: 

and the other? in what way is she to die? 

creon: 

along a desolate pathway i will lead her, 

and shut her, living, in a rocky vault 

with no more food than will appease the gods, 

so that the city may not be defiled. 

hades, who is the only god she worships, 

may hear her prayers, and rescue her from death. 

otherwise she will learn at last, though late, 730 

that to revere the dead is useless toil. 

exit creon 
chorus: 

none may withstand you, o love unconquered, 

seizing the wealth of man as your prey, 
in the cheek of a maiden keeping your vigil, 

till night has faded again to day. 
you roam the wilds to men's farthest dwellings, 

you haunt the boundless face of the sea. 
no god may escape you, no short-lived mortal 

from the madness that love inflicts may flee. 

23 



sophocles 

ybu twist our minds until ruin follows. 740 

the ]ust tn unrighteous vi .i\ s you turn. 
you h.iv e goaded kinsman n> stri\ e \» it h kinsman 

1 ill the fires of hitter hatred burn. 
in the eyes of .1 bride you shine triumphant; 

beside the eternal laws \ our throne 

1 ternaj stands, for great aphrodite, 
resistless, works her will on her own. 

but now i too am moved. i cannot keep 
within the hounds of loyalty. 1 weep 

when 1 behold antigone, the bride, 750 

nearing the room where all at last abide. 



enter antigone, guarded 

antigone: 

see me, my countrymen! see with what pain 
i tread the path i shall not tread again, 
looking my last upon the light of day 

that shines for me no more. 
hades, who gives his sleep to all, me, living, leads away 

to acheron's dark shore. 
not mine the hymeneal chant, not mine the bridal song, 

for i, a bride, to acheron belong. 

chorus: 

glorious, therefore, and with praise vou tread 760 

the pathway to the deep gulf of the dead. 
you have not felt the force of fate's decrees, 
struck down by violence, wasted by disease; 
but of your own free will you choose to go, 
alone of mortals, to the world below. 

antigone: 

i know how sad a death she suffered, she 
who was our guest here, phrygian niobe. 
stone spread upon her, close as ivy grows, 

and locked her in its chains. 
now on her wasted form, men say, fall ceaselessly the 

snows, 770 

fall ceaselessly the rains; 
while from her grieving eyes drop tears, tears that 
her bosom steep. 
and like hers, my fate lulls me now to sleep. 



24 



antigone 
chorus: 

she was a goddess of the gods' great race; 
mortals are we and mortal lineage trace. 
but for a woman the renown is great 
in life and death to share a godlike fate. 

antigone: 

by our fathers' gods, i am mocked! i am mocked! ah! why, 

you men of wealth, do you taunt me before i die? 780 

o sacred grove of the city! o waters that flow 

from the spring of dirce! be witness; to you i cry. 
what manner of woman i am you know 
and by what laws, unloved, unlamented, i go 

to my rocky prison, to my unnatural tomb. 
alas, how ill-bestead! 

no fellowship have i; no others can share my doom, 
neither mortals nor corpses, neither the quick nor the dead. 

chorus: 

you have rushed forward with audacious feet 
and dashed yourself against the law's high seat. 790 

that was a grevious fall, my child, and yet 
in this ordeal you pay your father's debt. 

antigone: 

you have touched on the heaviest grief that my heart 
can hold: 
grief for my father, sorrow that never grows old 
for our famous house and its doom that the fates have spun. 

my mother's bed! ah! how can its horrors be told? 
my mother who yielded her love to one 
who was at once my father and her son. 

born of such parents, with them henceforth i abide, 

wretched, accursed, unwed. 800 

and you, polyneices, you found an ill-fated bride, 
and i, the living, am ruined by you, the dead. 

chorus: 

a pious action may of praise be sure, 
but he who rules a land cannot endure 
an act of disobedience to his rule. 
your own self-will you have not learned to school. 

antigone: 

unwept, unfriended, without marriage song, 
forth on my road i miserable am led; 
i may not linger. not for long 

25 



sophocles 

shall i, most u retched, sec the holv sun. 810 

.m\ t.ite no friend bewails, not one; 
1 oi me no tear is shed. 

enter ou on 



i kl us: 



1>" you not know that singing and lamentation 
would rise incessantly as death approached, 

if they could be of service? lead her away! 

obey my orders. shut her in her grave 

and leave her there, alone. then she can take 

her choice of living in that home, or dying. 

i am not stained by the guilt of this girl's blood, 

but she shall see the light of day no longer. 820 

antigon] : 

o tomb! o cavern! everlasting prison! 

bridal-chamber! to you 1 make my way 
to join my kindred, all those who have died 
and have been greeted by persephone. 
the last and far most miserable of all, 

1 seek them now, before 1 have lived my life. 
yet high are the hopes i cherish that mv coming 
will be most welcome to mv father; welcome, 
mother, to you; and welcome to you, brother. 

for when yon died i ministered to you all, 830 

with my own hands washed you and dressed your bodies, 

and poured libations at vour graves. and now, 

because i have given to you, too, polyneices, 

such honors as i could, i am brought to this. 

and \et all wise men will approve my act. 

not for my children, had i been a mother, 

not for a husband, for his moldering body, 

would i have set mvself against the city 

as i have done. and the law sanctions me. 

losing a husband, i might find another. 840 

i could have other children. but mv parents 

are hidden from me in the underworld, 

so that no brother's life can bud and bloom 

ever again. and therefore, polvneices, 

i paid vou special honor. and for this 

creon has held me guiltv of evil-doing. 

and leads me captive for mv too great boldness. 

no bridal bed is mine, no bridal song, 

no share in the jovs of marriage, and no share 

in nursing children and in tending them. 850 

but thus afflicted, destitute of friends, 

26 



antigone 

living, i go down to the vaults of death. 
what is the law of heaven that i have broken? 
why should i any longer look to the gods, 
ill-fated as i am? whose aid should i invoke, 
when i for piety am called impious? 
if this pleases the gods, then i shall learn 
that sin brought death upon me. but if the sin 
lies in my judges, i could wish for them 

no harsher fate than they have decreed for me. 860 

chorus: 

still the storm rages; still the same gusts blow, 
troubling her spirit with their savage breath. 

creon: 

yes. and her guards will pay for being slow. 

antigone: 

ah! with those words i have drawn close to death. 

creon: 

you cannot hope that you will now be freed 
from the fulfillment of the doom decreed. 

antigone: 

o thebes, o land of my fathers, o city! 
o gods who begot and guarded my house from of old! 

they seize me, they snatch me away! 

now, now! they show no pity. 870 

they give no second's delay. 
you elders, you leaders of thebes, behold me, behold! 

the last of the house of your kings, the last. 

see what i suffer. see the doom 

that is come upon me, and see from whom, 
because to the laws of heaven i held fast. 

exeunt antigone and guards 
chorus: 

this likewise danae endured: 
the light of heaven she changed for a home brass-bound, 

in a tomb-like chamber close immured. 
and yet, o my child, her race was with honor crowned, 880 

and she guarded the seed of zeus gold-showered. 
but naught from the terrible power of fate is free- 
neither war, nor city walls high-towered, 
nor wealth, nor black ships beaten by the sea. 

he too bowed down beneath his doom, 
the son of dryas, swift-angered edonian king, 

shut fast in a rockv prison's gloom. 
how he roused the god with his mad tongue's mocking sting, 

as his frenzy faded, he came to know; 

27 



sophocles 

for he sought to make the god-filled maenads mute, 890 

i quench the bacchic torches' glow, 

and angered the .muses, lovers of the flute. 

bv the double sea and the dark rocks steely hlue 

the beach of bosporus lies ami the savage shore 
of thracian salmydessus. there the bride 

of phineus, w hose tierce heart no mcrcv knew, 
dealt his two sons a blow that for vengeance cried; 

ares beheld her hand, all stained with gore. 
grasping the pointed shuttle that pierced through 

their eves that saw no more. 900 

in misery pining, their lot they lamented aloud, 

sons of a mother whose fortune in marriage was ill. 
from the ancient line of erechtheus her blood she traced; 

nurtured in caves far-distant and nursed in cloud, 
daughter of boreas, daughter of gods, she raced 

swift as a steed on the slope of the soaring hill. 
and yet, o child, o child, she also bowed 

to the long-lived fates' harsh will. 

enter tiresias and boy 
tiresias: 

elders of thebes, we have come to you with one 

finding for both the pathway that we followed, 910 

for in this fashion must the blind be guided. 
creon: 

what tidings, old tiresias, are you bringing? 
tiresias: 

i will inform you, i the seer. give heed. 

creon: 

to ignore your counsel has not been my custom. 
tiresias: 

therefore you kept thebes on a steady course. 

creon: 

i can bear witness to the help you gave. 
tiresias: 

mark this. you stand upon the brink of ruin. 
creon : 

what terrible words are those? what do you mean? 
tiresias: 

my meaning is made manifest by my art 

and my art's omens. as i took my station 920 

upon mv ancient seat of augury, 

where round me birds of every sort come flocking, 

28 



creon: 



antigone 

i could no longer understand their language. 

it was drowned out in a strange, savage clamor, 

shrill, evil, frenzied, inarticulate. 

the whirr of wings told me their murderous talons 

tore at each other. filled with dread, i then 

made trial of burnt sacrifice. the altar 

was fully kindled, but no clear, bright flame 

leaped from the offering; only fatty moisture 930 

oozed from the flesh and trickled on the embers, 

smoking and sputtering. the bladder burst, 

and scattered in the air. the folds of fat 

wrapping the thigh-bones melted and left them bare. 

such was the failure of the sacrifice, 

that did not yield the sign that i was seeking. 

i learned these things from this boy's observation; 

he is my guide as i am guide to others. 

your edict brings this suffering to the city, 

for every hearth of ours has been defiled 940 

and every altar. there the birds and dogs 

have brought their carrion, torn from the corpse 

of ill-starred polyneices. hence, the gods 

refuse our prayers, refuse our sacrifice, 

refuse the flame of our burnt-offerings. 

no birds cry clearly and auspiciously, 

for they are glutted with a slain man's blood. 

therefore, my son, consider what has happened. 

all men are liable to grievous error; 950 

but he who, having erred, does not remain 

inflexible, but rather makes amends 

for ill, is not unwise or unrewarded. 

stubborn self-will incurs the charge of folly. 

give to the fallen the honors he deserves 

and do not stab him. are you being brave 

when you inflict new death upon the dead? 

your good i think of; for your good i speak, 

and a wise counselor is sweet to hear 

when the advice he offers proves of value. 

old man, all of you shoot your arrows at me 960 

like archers at a target. you have used 

even the art of prophecy in your plotting. 

long have the tribe of prophets traded in me, 

like a ship's cargo. drive whatever bargain 

may please you, buy, sell, heap up for yourself 

silver of sardis, gold of india. yet 

i tell you this: that man shall not be buried, 

29 



sophocles 

not though the eagles of zeus himself should bear 

the carrion morsels to their master's throne. 

not even from the dread oi such pollution 970 

will 1 permit his burial, since 1 know 
there is no mortal cm defile the gods. 
but even the wisest men disastrously 
may tall, 1 iresias, u hen tor money's sake 
1 hey utter shameful words with specious wisdom. 
ilki si \s 

ah! do men understand, or even consider— 

1 kl on: 

consider what? doubtless some platitude! 
tires ias: 

how precious beyond anv wealth is prudence. 
creon : 

how full of evil is the lack of prudence. 
tiresias: 

vet you are sick, sick with that same disease. 980 

creon : 

i will not in reply revile a prophet. 

tiresias: 

you do. you say my prophecy is false. 
creon : 

well, all the race of seers are mercenary. 

tiresias: 

and love of base wealth marks the breed of tyrants. 
creon : 

are you aware that you address your king? 

tiresias: 

i made you king by helping you save thebes. 
creon : 

wise in your art and vicious in your acts. 
tiresias: 

do not enrage me. i should keep my secret. 
creon : 

reveal it. speak. but do not look for profit. 

tiresias: 

you too will find no profit in my words. 990 

creon: 

how can you earn your pav? i will not change. 

tiresias: 

then know this. yes, be very sure of it. 

only a few more times will you behold 

the swift course of the chariot of the sun 

before you give as payment for the dead 

your own dead flesh and blood. for you have thrust 

30 



antigone 

a living soul to darkness, in a tomb 
imprisoned without pity. and a corpse, 
belonging to the gods below you keep 

unpurified, unburied, unrevered. iooo 

the dead are no concern either of yours 
or of the gods above, yet you offend them. 
so the avengers, the destroyers, furies 
of hades and the gods, lurking in ambush, 
wait to inflict your sins upon your head. 
do you still think my tongue is lined with silver? 
a time will come, and will not linger coming, 
that will awaken in your house the wailing 
of men and women. hatred shakes the cities, 
hatred of you. their sons are mangled corpses, ioio 

hallowed with funeral rites by dogs or beasts 
or birds who bear the all-polluting stench 
to every city having hearth or altar. 
you goaded me, and therefore like an archer 
i shoot my angry arrows at your heart, 
sure arrows; you shall not escape their sting. 
boy, lead me home. let him expend his rage 
on younger men, and let him learn to speak 
with a more temperate tongue, and school his heart 
to feelings finer than his present mood. 1020 

exeunt tiresias and boy 

chorus: 

sir, he is gone, with fearful prophecies. 

and from the time that these dark hairs have whitened, 

i have known this: never has he foretold 

anything that proved false concerning thebes. 
creon: 

i also know it well, and it dismays me. 

to yield is bitter. but to resist, and bring 

a curse upon my pride is no less bitter. 
chorus: 

son of menoeceus, listen. you must listen. 
creon: 

what should i do? tell me, i will obey. 
chorus: 

go. free the girl. release her from the cavern, 1030 

and build a tomb for the man you would not bury. 
creon: 

so that is your advice— that i should yield? 
chorus: 

sir, you should not delav. the gods are swift 

in cutting short man's folly with their curse. 

31 



sophocles 
creon 

i low hard it is to change! yet 1 obey. 
1 will gi\ e up \\ hat 1 had set m) heart on. 
no one can stand against the blows of fate, 
c mat s. 

go. go yourself. these things arc nut for others. 

creon : 

i will go this moment. guards there! all of you! 

take up your axes. quick! quick! over there. 1040 

i imprisoned her myself, and i myself 

will set her free. and yet my mind misgives me. 

never to break the ancient law is best. 

exit creon 
chorus: 

thou art known by many a name. 

o bacchus! to thee we call. 

cadmean semcle's glory and pride, 
begotten of zeus, whose terrible lightnings flame, 

whose thunders appall. 
bacchus, thou dost for us all in thy love provide. 

over icaria thou dost reign, 1050 

and where the worshippers journey slow 

to the rites of eleusis, where mountains shield 
the multitudes crossing demeter's welcoming plain. 
thou makest this mother-city of maenads thine own, 

a city beside the rippling flow 
of the gentle river, beside the murderous field 

where the teeth of the dragon were sown. 

in the torches' wind-blown flare 

thou art seen, in their flicker and smoke. 

where the two- fold peaks of parnassus gleam, 1060 

corycian nymphs, as they move through the ruddy glare, 

thee, bacchus, invoke. 
they move in their dance beside the castalian stream. 

o bacchus, guardian divine! 

down from the slopes of nysa's hills 

where a mantle of ivy covers the ground, 
from headlands rich with the purple grape and the vine, 
thou comest to us, thou comest. o be not long! 

thy triumph the echoing citv fills. 
the streets are loud with thy praises; the highways 

resound, 1070 

resound with immortal song. 

thou honorest highly our theban city, 
thou, and thy mother by lightning slain. 

32 



antigone 

our people sicken. o bacchus have pity! 

across the strait with its moaning wave, 
down from parnassus, come thou again! 

come with thy healing feet, and save! 

o thou who leadest the stars in chorus, 

jubilant stars with their breath of fire, 
offspring of zeus, appear before us! 1080 

lord of the tumult of night, appear! 
with the frenzied dance of thy maenad choir, 

bacchus, thou giver of good, draw near! 



enter messenger 
messenger: 

you of the house of cadmus and amphion, 

no man's estate can ever be established 

firmly enough to warrant praise or blame. 

fortune, from day to day, exalts the lucky 

and humbles the unlucky. no one knows 

whether his present lot can long endure. 

for creon once was blest, as i count blessings; 1090 

he had saved this land of cadmus from its foes; 

he was the sovereign and ruled alone, 

the noble father of a royal house. 

and now, all has been lost. because a man 

who has forfeited his joy is not alive, 

he is a living corpse. heap, if you will, 

your house with riches; live in regal pomp. 

yet if your life is unhappy, all these things 

are worth not even the shadow of a vapor 

put in the balance against joy alone. 1100 

chorus: 

what new disaster has the king's house suffered? 
messenger: 

death. and the guilt of death lies on the living. 
chorus: 

the guilt of death! who has been killed? who killed him? 
messenger: 

haemon is killed, and by no stranger's hand. 
chorus: 

he killed himself? or did his father kill him? 
messenger: 

he killed himself, enraged by his murderous father. 
chorus: 

tiresias! now your prophecy is fulfilled. 

33 



s () p ll c l e s 

ml ss| s,.i k: 

consider, therefore, what remains to do. 
cbomi i 

rhere is the queen, w retched i urj dice. 

perhaps mere chance has brought her from the palace; 1 1 10 

perhaps she has learned the news about her son. 

elltcr kurydice 
1 l b.ydh i : 

thebans, 1 heard you talking here together 
when 1 was on my way to greet the goddess, 
pallas athene, and to pray to her. 
just as 1 loosed the fastening of the door, 
the words that told of my calamity 
struck heavily upon my ear. in terror 
1 fell back fainting in my women's arms. 
but now, repeat your storv. 1 shall hear it 

as one who is not ignorant of grief. 1120 

messenger: 

my ladv, 1 will bear witness to what i saw, 

and will omit no syllable of the truth. 

why should 1 comfort you with words that later 

would prove deceitful? truth is always best. 

across the plain 1 guided my lord creon 

to where unpitied polyneices lay, 

a corpse mangled by dogs. then we besought 

hecate, goddess of the roads, and pluto 

to moderate their wrath, and to show mercy. 

we washed the dead with ceremonial water. 1 1 30 

gathering the scattered fragments that remained. 

with fresh-cut boughs we burned them. we heaped up 

a mound of native earth above his ashes. 

then we approached the cavern of death's bride, 

the rock-floored marriage-chamber. w'hile as yet 

we were far distant, someone heard the sound 

of loud lament in that unhallowed place, 

and came to tell our master. as the king 

drew near, there floated through the air a voice, 

faint, indistinct, that uttered a bitter cry. 1140 

the king burst out in anguish: 'can it be 

that i, in my misery, have become a prophet? 

will this be the saddest road i ever trod? 

mv son's voice greets me. quickly, slaves! go quickly! 

when you have reached the sepulcher, get through 

the opening where the stones are wrenched away, 

get to the mouth of the burial chamber. look, 

see if i know his voice— haemon's, my son's— 

or if i am deluded by the gods.' 

34 



antigone 

we followed our despairing master's bidding 1150 

and in the farthest recess of the tomb 

we found antigone, hanging, with her veil 

noosed round her neck. and with her we found haemon, 

his arms flung round her waist, grieving aloud 

for his bride lost in death, his ruined marriage, 

his father's deeds. but when his father saw him, 

creon cried piteously and going in, 

called to him brokenly: 'my son, my son, 

what have you done? what are you thinking of? 

what dreadful thing has driven you out of your mind? 1 160 

son, come away. i beg you. i beseech you.' 

but haemon glared at him with furious eyes 

instead of answering, spat in his face, 

and drew his sword. his father turned to fly 

so that he missed his aim. immediately, 

in bitter self-reproach, the wretched boy 

leaned hard against his sword, and drove it deep 

into his side. then while his life yet lingered, 

with failing strength he drew antigone close; 

and as he lay there gasping heavily, n 70 

over her white cheek his blood ebbed away. 

the dead lie clasped together. he is wedded, 

not in this world but in the house of death. 

he has borne witness that of all the evils 

afflicting man, the worst is lack of wisdom. 

exit eurydice 
chorus: 

what does that mean? who can interpret it? 

the queen has gone without a single word. 
messenger: 

it startles me. and yet i hope it means 

that hearing these dreadful things about her son, 

she will not let herself show grief in public 1 1 80 

but will lament in private with her women. 

schooled in discretion, she will do no wrong. 
chorus: 

how can we tell? surely too great a silence 

is no less ominous than too loud lament. 
messenger: 

then i will enter. perhaps she is concealing 

some secret purpose in her passionate heart. 

i will find out, for you are right in saying 

too great a silence may be ominous. 

exit messenger. enter creon with attendants, 
carrying the body of haemon on a bier 

35 



sophocles 
chokl b: 

ithebans, k •« ik there! the king himself draws near, 

bearing a load whose tale is all run clear. 1190 

i ins is .1 work- it we dare speak our thought— 

1 hat not another's hut his own hands wrought. 

t kl 1>n 

o, how may my sin be told? 
the stubborn, death-fraught sin of a darkened brain! 

behold us here, behold 

father .uid son, the slayer and the slain! 

pain, onlv pain 
has come of my design. 

kate struck too soon; too soon your spirit fled. 

mv son, my young son, you are king dead 1200 

not for your follv, but for mine, for mine. 

chorus: 

sir, you have come to learn the right too late. 
creon : 

my lesson has been bitter and complete. 
some god has struck me down with crushing weight, 
filling my heart with cruelty and hate, 
trampling my happiness beneath his feet. 
grief, bitter grief, is man's fate. 

enter messenger 
messenger (indicating haemon): 

your load is heavy, sir, but there is more. 

that is the burden you are bearing now. 

soon you must bear new woe within your house. 12 10 

creon: 

and what worse misery can follow this? 

messenger: 

your wife is dead, a mother like her son. 
poor woman, by her own hand she has died. 

creon: 

bv her own hand she died. 
death, spare me! can you never have your fill? 

never be satisfied? 
herald of evil, messenger of ill, 

your harsh words kill, 
thev smite me now anew. 

my wife is dead— you tell me mv wife is dead. 1220 

death after death is heaped upon mv head. 
speak to me, boy. is what you tell me true? 

36 



antigone 

messenger: 

it is no longer hidden. sir, look there. 

(the body of eurydice is disclosed 
through the palace doors) 
creon: 

another horror that makes blind mine eyes! 
what further agony has fate in store? 
my dead son's body in my arms i bore, 
and now beside him his dead mother lies. 
i can endure no more. 
messenger: 

there at the altar with a keen-edged knife 

she stabbed herself; and as her eyes were darkened, 1230 

she wailed the death of megareus, her son, 
who earlier had met a noble fate; 
she wailed for haemon; then, with her last breath, 
you, as the slayer of your sons, she cursed. 
creon: 

i am shaken with terror, with terror past belief. 
is there none here to end my anguish? none? 

no sword to pierce me? broken with my grief, 
so steeped in agony that we are one. 
messenger: 

sir, as she died, she burdened you with guilt, 
charging you with the death of both your sons. 1240 

creon: 

and by what act of violence did she die? 
messenger: 

hearing the shrill lament for haemon's fate, 
deep in her heart she drove the bright blade home. 
creon (to haemon): 

i am your slayer, i alone. 
i am guilty, only i. 

i, and none other, must atone. 

lead me away. the truth i own. 

nothing is left, except to die. 

chorus: 

if anything can be good, those words are good. 

for when calamity has come upon us, 1250 

the thing that is the briefest is the best. 

creon: 

draw near me, death! o longed for death, draw near! 
most welcome destiny, make no delay. 

tell me my last hour, my last breath, is here. 
i have no wish to see another day. 

37 



sophocles 
chokl | 

such things are yet t«> come. we arc concerned 
\\ ith doing w li.it must needs l>e done today. 
1 ik- future rests in other hands than ours. 
( hi on: 

that is my w hole desire. thar is mv prayer. 

chokl s 

\ do nut pray. .men niusr accept their doom. 1260 

1 ki d\: 

\1\ life's work there before me lies. 
\1\ folly slew my wife, my son. 

i know not where to turn mine eyes. 
all my misdeeds before me rise. 

lead me away, brought low, undone. 

exit creon 
chorus: 

the crown of happiness is to be wise. 
honor the gods, and the gods' edicts prize. 
thev strike down boastful men and men grown bold. 
wisdom we learn at last, when we are old. 



38 



c^cmpvis fuc jc^ci 



characters in the play 

oedipus, king of thebes 

jocasta, queen of thebes, wife and mother of oedipus 

creon, brother of jocasta 

tiresias, a prophet 

boy, attendant of tiresias 

priest of zeus 
shepherd 

first messenger, from corinth 

second messenger 

chorus of theban elders 

attendants 



oedipus the king 

scene: before the doors of the palace of oedipus at thebes. 
a crowd of citizens are seated next to the two altars 
at the sides. in front of one of the altars stands the 

priest of zeus. 

enter oedipus 

oedipus: 

why are you here as suppliants, my children, 

you in whose veins the blood of cadmus flows? 

what is the reason for your boughs of olive, 

the fumes of incense, the laments and prayers 

that fill the city? because i thought it wrong, 

my children, to depend on what was told me, 

i have come to you myself, i, oedipus, 

renowned in the sight of all. {to priest) tell me— you are 

their natural spokesman— what desire or fear 

brings vou before me? i will gladly give you 10 

such help as is in my power. it would be heartless 

not to take pity on a plea like this. 



priest: 



king oedipus, you see us, young and old, 

gathered about your altars: some, mere fledglings 

not able yet to fly; some, bowed with age; 

some, priests, and i the priest of zeus among them; 

and these, who are the flower of our young manhood. 

the rest of us are seated— the whole city— 

with our wreathed branches in the market places, 

before the shrines of pallas, before the fire 20 

by which we read the auguries of apollo. 

thebes, as you see yourself, is overwhelmed 

by the waves of death that break upon her head. 

no fruit comes from her blighted buds; her cattle 

die in the fields; her wives bring forth dead children. 

a hideous pestilence consumes the city, 

striking us down like a god armed with fire, 

emptying the house of cadmus, filling full 

the dark of hades with loud lamentation. 

i and these children have not thronged your altars 30 

because we hold you equal to the immortals, 

but because we hold you foremost among men, 

41 



sophocles 

both in the happenings of daily life 

and when some > imtat ion ot the gods 

i nfronts us. i or we know that when you came here, 

vou freed us from our bondage, the bitter tribute 

1 ik sphinx wrung from us by her sorceries. 

and w e know too i hat \ ou accomplished this 

without foreknov ledge, or clue that vt e could furnish. 

\\ e think, indeed, some god befriended you, 40 

when \ ou renewed our lues. therefore, great king, 

( ilorious in all men's eyes, we now beseech you 

to find some way of helping us, your suppliants, 

some way the gods themselves have told you of, 

or one that lies within our mortal power; 

for the words of men experienced in evil 

are mighty and effectual. oedipus! 

rescue our city and preserve vour honor, 

since the land hails you as her savior now 

for your past service. never let us say 50 

that when you ruled us, we were lifted up 

only to be thrown down. restore the state 

and keep it forever steadfast. bring again 

the happiness and good fortune you once brought us. 

if you are still to reign as you reign now, 

then it is better to have men for subjects 

than to be king of a mere wilderness, 

since neither ship nor town has any value 

without companions or inhabitants. 

oedipus: 

i pity you, my children. well i know 60 

what hopes have brought vou here, and well 1 know 

that all of vou are suffering. yet your grief, 

however great, is not so great as mine. 

each of vou suffers for himself alone, 

but my heart feels the heaviness of my sorrow, 

your sorrow, and the sorrow of all the others. 

you have not roused me, i have not been sleeping. 

no. i have wept, wept long and bitterly, 

treading the devious paths of anxious thought; 

and i have taken the only hopeful course 70 

that i could find. i have sent mv kinsman, creon, 

son of menoeceus, to the pvthian home 

of phoebus apollo to find what word or deed 

of mine might save the city. he has delayed 

too long already, his absence troubles me; 

but when he comes, i pledge mvself to do 

my utmost to obev the god's command. 

42 



oedipus the king 
priest: 

your words are timelv, for even as vou speak 
they sign to me that creon is drawing near. 

oedipus: 

o lord apollo! grant he may bring to us 80 

fortune as smiling as his smiling face. 

prilist: 

surely he brings good fortune. look! the crown 
of bay leaves that he wears is full of berries. 

oedipus: 

we shall know soon, for he is close enough 

to hear us. brother, son of monoeceus, speak! 

\\ 'hat news? what news do you bring us from the god? 



enter creon 

creon: 

good news. if we can find the fitting way 
to end this heavy scourge, all will be well. 

oedipus: 

that neither gives me courage nor alarms me. 

what does the god say? what is the oracle? 90 

creon: 

if vou wish me to speak in public, i will do so. 
otherwise let us go in and speak alone. 

oedipus: 

speak here before everyone. i feel more sorrow 
for their sakes than i feel for my own life. 
creon: 

then i will give the message of lord phoebus: 
a plain command to drive out the pollution 
here in our midst, and not to nourish it 
till our disease has grown incurable. 

oedipus: 

w 7 hat rite will purge us? how are we corrupted? 
creon: 

we must banish a man, or have him put to death 100 

to atone for the blood he shed, for it is blood 
that has brought this tempest down upon the city. 

oedipus: 

who is the victim whose murder is revealed? 

creon: 

king laius, who was our lord before you came 
to steer the city on its proper course. 

oedipus: 

i know his name well, but i never saw him. 
43 



sophocles 

( ki us: 

laius was killed, and now wc are commanded 
i o punish his killers, whoever they may be. 

hi kill s 

i low can they he- discovered? where shall we look 

for the t.iinr traces <>t this ancient crime? no 

( ki o\: 

in thebes, the god said. truth can be always found: 

only what is neglected ever escapes. 
01 pii'i s: 

where was king laius murdered? in his home, 

out in the fields, or in some foreign land? 

creon : 

he told us he was journeying to delphi. 
after he left, he was never seen again. 
oedipus: 

was no one with king laius who saw what happened? 
you could have put his story to good use. 

creo.n : 

the sole survivor fled from the scene in terror, 

and there was onlv one thing he was sure of. 120 

of.dipus: 

what was it? a clue might lead us far 
which gave us even the faintest glimmer of hope. 
creon: 

he said that thev were violently attacked 
not by one man but by a band of robbers. 

oedipus: 

robbers are not so daring. were they bribed 

to commit this crime by some one here in thebes? 
creon: 

that was suspected. but in our time of trouble 

no one appeared to avenge the death of laius. 
oedipus: 

but your king was killed! what troubles could you have had 

to keep you from searching closely for his killers? 130 

creon: 

we had the sphinx. her riddle made us turn 

from mysteries to what lay before our doors. 
oedipus: 

then i will start fresh and again make clear 

things that are dark. all honor to apollo 

and to you, creon, for acting as you have done 

on the dead king's behalf. so i will take 

my rightful place beside you as your ally, 

avenging thebes and bowing to the god. 

44 



priest: 



oedipus the king 

not for a stranger will i dispel this taint, 

but for my own sake, since the murderer, 140 

whoever he is, may strike at me as well. 

therefore in helping laius i help myself. 

come, children, come! rise from the altar steps, 

and carry away those branches. summon here 

the people of cadmus. tell them i mean to leave 

nothing undone. so with apollo's aid 

we may at last be saved— or meet destruction. 

exit oedipus 

my children, let us go. the king has promised 

the favor that we sought. and may lord phoebus 

come to us with his oracles, assuage 150 

our misery, and deliver us from death. 

exeunt. enter chorus 

chorus: 

the god's great word, in whose sweetness we ever rejoice, 

to our glorious city is drawing nigh, 
now, even now, from the gold of the delphic shrine. 

what next decree will be thine, 
apollo, thou healer, to whom in our dread we cry? 

we are anguished, racked, and beset by fears! 
what fate will be ours? one fashioned for us alone, 
or one that in ancient time was known 

that returns once more with the circling years? 160 

child of our golden hope, o speak, thou immortal voice! 

divine athene, daughter of zeus, o hear! 

hear thou, artemis! thee we hail, 
our guardian goddess throned in the market place. 

apollo, we ask thy grace. 
shine forth, all three, and the menace of death will fail. 

answer our call! shall we call in vain? 
if ever ye came in the years that have gone before, 

return, and save us from plague once more, 

rescue our city from fiery pain! 170 

be your threefold strength our shield. draw near to us now, draw near! 

death is upon us. we bear a burden of bitter grief. 
there is nothing can save us now, no device that our thought can frame. 
no blossom, no fruit, no harvest sheaf 
springs from the blighted and barren earth. 
women cry out in travail and bring no children to birth; 
but swift as a bird, swift as the sweep of flame, 

45 



sophocles 

i lie- after life takes sudden flight 
to the western god, to the last, dark shore of night. 

ruin has tailed on i hebes. w ithout number her children are 

dead; 180 

(jnmourned, unattended, unpitied, the) lie polluting the ground. 
gre\ -haired mothers and wives new-wed 
\\ ail at the altars e\ erj w here, 

with entreats , w ith loud lament, with clamor rilling the air. 
and songs ol praise to apollo, the healer, resound. 

athene, thou know est our desperate need. 
lend us tin strength. give heed to our prayer, give heed! 

fierce ares has fallen upon us. he comes unarrayed for war, 
yet he rills our ears with shrieking, he folds us in fiery death. 

grant that he soon may turn in headlong flight from our land, ioo 
swept to the western deep by the fair wind's favoring breath, 

or swept to the savage sea that washes the thracian shore. 
we few who escape the night are stricken down in the day. 

o zeus, whose bolts of thunder are balanced within thv hand, 
hurl down thy lightning upon him! father, be swift to slay! 

save us, light-bringing phoebus! the shower of thine arrows let fly; 
loose them, triumphant and swift, from the golden string of thy bow! 

o goddess, his radiant sister, roaming the lycian glade, 
come with the flash of thy fire! artemis, conquer our foe! 

and thou, o wine-flushed god to whom the bacchantes cry, 200 
with thy brilliant torch ablaze amid shouts of thy maenad train, 

with thy hair enwreathed with gold, o bacchus, we beg thine aid 
against our destroyer ares, the god whom the gods disdain! 



enter oedipus 
oedipus: 

you have been praving. if you heed my words 

and seek the remedy for your own disease, 

the gods will hear vour prayers, and you will find 

relief and comfort. i myself know nothing 

about this story, nothing about the murder, 

so that unaided and without a clue 

i could not have tracked it down for any distance. 210 

and because i have onlv recently been received 

among you as a citizen, to you all, 

and to all the rest, i make this proclamation: 

whoever knows the man who killed king laius, 

let him declare his knowledge openly. 

46 



oedipus the king 

if he himself is guilty, let him confess 

and go unpunished, except for banishment. 

or if he knows the murderer was an alien, 

let him by speaking earn his due reward, 

and thanks as well. but if he holds his tongue, 220 

hoping to save himself or save a friend, 

then let him hear what i, the king, decree 

for all who live in thebes, the land i rule. 

no one shall give this murderer shelter. no one 

shall speak to him. no one shall let him share 

in sacrifice or prayer or lustral rites. 

the door of every house is barred against him. 

the god has shown me that he is polluted. 

so by this edict i ally myself 

with phoebus and the slain. as for the slayer, 230 

whether he had accomplices or not, 

this is my solemn prayer concerning him: 

may evil come of evil; may he live 

a wretched life and meet a wretched end. 

and as for me, if i should knowingly 

admit him as a member of my household, 

may the same fate which i invoked for others 

fall upon me. make my words good, i charge you, 

for love of me, apollo, and our country 

blasted by the displeasure of the gods. 240 

you should not have left this guilt unpurified, 

even without an oracle to urge you, 

when a man so noble, a man who was your king, 

had met his death. rather, it was your duty 

to seek the truth. but now, since it is i 

who hold the sovereignty that once was his, 

i who have wed his wife, who would have been 

bound to him by the tie of having children 

born of one mother, if he had had a child 

to be a blessing, if fate had not struck him down— 250 

since this is so, i intend to fight his battle 

as though he were my father. i will leave 

nothing undone to find his murderer, 

avenging him and all his ancestors. 

and i pray the gods that those who disobey 

may suffer. mav their fields bring forth no harvest, 

their wives no children; mav the present plague, 

or one yet worse, consume them. but as for you, 

all of you citizens who are loyal to me, 

may justice, our champion, and all the gods 260 

show you their favor in the days to come. 

47 



sophocles 

l i it >k i s 

king oedipus, 1 will speak to avoid your curse. 
1 am no slayer, nor can i point him out. 
the question came to us from phoebus apollo; 
ir is for him to tell us who is guilty. 

»>! dip1 v 

yes. bui no man on earth is strong enough 
1<> force tin.- gods to act against their will. 
( iiokl s: 

there is, i think, a second course to follow. 

oed11h v 

if there is yet a third, let me know that. 

chorus: 

tiresias, the prophet, has the clearest vision 270 

next to our lord apollo. he is the man 
who can do most to help us in our search. 

oedipl s: 

i have not forgotten. creon suggested it, 
and i have summoned him, summoned him twice. 
i am astonished he is not here already. 
chorus: 

the onlv rumors are old and half -forgotten. 

oedipus: 

what are they? i must find out all i can. 
chorus: 

it is said the king was killed bv travelers. 

oedipus: 

so i have heard, but there is no eye-witness. 
chorus: 

if fear can touch them, thev will reveal themselves 280 

once they have heard so dreadful a curse as yours. 

oedipus: 

murderers are not terrified by words. 

chorus: 

but thev can be convicted bv the man 
being brought here now, tiresias. he alone 
is godlike in his knowledge of the truth. 



enter tiresias, led by a boy 
oedipus: 

you know all things in heaven and earth, tiresias: 

things you mav speak of openly, and secrets 

holv and not to be revealed. you know, 

blind though you are, the plague that ruins thebes. 

and you, great prophet, you alone can save us. 290 

48 



oedipus the king 

phoebus has sent an answer to our question, 
an answer that the messengers may have told you, 
saying there was no cure for our condition 
until we found the killers of king laius 
and banished them or had them put to death. 
therefore, tiresias, do not begrudge your skill 
in the voice of birds or other prophecy, 
but save yourself, save me, save the whole city, 
save everything that the pestilence defiles. 
we are at your mercy, and man's noblest task 300 

is to use all his powers in helping others. 
tiresias: 

how dreadful a thing, how dreadful a thing is wisdom, 
when to be wise is useless! this i knew 
but i forgot, or else i would never have come. 

oedipus: 

what is the matter? why are you so troubled? 
tiresias: 

oedipus, let me go home. then you will bear 
your burden, and i mine, more easily. 

oedipus: 

custom entitles us to hear your message. 

by being silent you harm your native land. 
tiresias: 

you do not know when, and when not to speak. 310 

silence will save me from the same misfortune. 
oedipus: 

if you can be of help, then all of us 

kneel and implore you not to turn away. 
tiresias: 

i refuse to pain you. i refuse to pain myself. 

it is useless to ask me. i will tell you nothing. 
oedipus: 

you utter scoundrel! you would enrage a stone! 

is there no limit to your stubbornness? 
tiresias: 

you blame my anger and forget your own. 
oedipus: 

no one could help being angry when he heard 

how you dishonor and ignore the state. 320 

tiresias: 

what is to come will come, though i keep silent 
oedipus: 

if it must come, your duty is to speak. 

tiresias: 

i will say no more. rage to your heart's content. 
49 



sophocles 

in tun s 

k.il'i \ cs, 1 w ill rage' 1 will spare you nothing. 
in the plot against king i aius, 1 ha\ e no doubt 
lli.it you were an accomplice, yc&, almost 
1 he actual killer. it you had not been blind, 

i would have said that you alone were guilty. 

1iki s! \s 

1 hen listen t(. my command! obey the edict 
that you yourself proclaimed and never speak, 330 

from tins d.n on, to me or any hieban. 

you are the sinner who pollutes our land. 

01 l'h'l s. 

1 lax e \ mi no shame? 1 low do you hope to escape 

the consequence of such an accusation? 
tiresias: 

1 have escaped. my strength is the living truth. 
01 dip! s: 

this is no prophecv. who taught you this? 

tireslxs: 

you did. you forced me to speak against my will. 
oedipi s: 

repeat vour slander. let me learn it better. 
tiresias: 

are you trving to tempt me into saving more? 

i have spoken alreadv. have vou not understood? 340 

okmpus: 

no, not entirclv. give your speech again. 
tiresias: 

i say you are the killer, you yourself. 

oedipus: 

twice the same insult! you will pay for it. 
tiresias: 

shall i sav more to make you still more angry? 

oedipus: 

sav what vou want to. it will make no sense. 

tiresias: 

you are living in shame with those most dear to you, 
as yet in ignorance of your dreadful fate. 

oedipus: 

do vou suppose that you can alwavs use 
language like that and not be punished for it? 
tiresias: 

yes. i am safe, if truth has anv strength. 350 

oedipus: 

truth can save anvone excepting you, 

you with no eyes, no hearing, and no brains! 

50 



oedipus the king 
tiresias: 

poor fool! you taunt me, but you soon will hear 
the self-same insults heaped upon your head. 

oedipus: 

you live in endless night. what can you do 
to me or anyone else who sees the day? 

tiresias: 

nothing. i have no hand in your destruction. 
for that, apollo needs no help from me. 
oedipus: 

apollo! is this your trick, or is it creon's? 

tiresias: 

creon is guiltless. the evil is in you. 360 

oedipus: 

how great is the envy roused by wealth, by kingship, 

by the subtle skill that triumphs over others 

in life's hard struggle! creon, who has been 

for years my trusted friend, has stealthily 

crept in upon me anxious to seize my power, 

the unsought gift the city freely gave me. 

anxious to overthrow me, he has bribed 

this scheming mountebank, this fraud, this trickster, 

blind in his art and in everything but money! 

your art of prophecy! when have you shown it? 370 

not when the watch-dog of the gods was here, 

chanting her riddle. why did you say nothing, 

when you might have saved the city? yet her puzzle 

could not be solved by the first passer-by. 

a prophet's skill was needed, and you proved 

that you had no such skill, either in birds 

or any other means the gods have given. 

but i came, i, the ignorant oedipus, 

and silenced her. i had no birds to help me. 

i used my brains. and it is i you now 380 

are trying to destrov in the hope of standing 

close beside creon's throne. you will regret 

this zeal of yours to purify the land, 

you and vour fellow-plotter. you seem old; 

otherwise you would pay for your presumption. 
chorus: 

sir, it appears to us that both of you 

have spoken in anger. anger serves no purpose. 

rather we should consider in what way 

we best can carry out the god's command. 

51 



sophocles 

rati si is: 

king though you arc, i have a right co answer 390 

1 qua] i>> yours. in chat 1 too am king. 

i serve apollo. i do not acknowledge 

\ ou as im\ lord or creon as my patron. 

you ha\c seen tit to taunt me with my blindness. 

therefore 1 tell you this: you have your eyesight 

and cannot see the sin ol your existence, 

( annot see where you live or whom you live with, 

are ignorant oi your parents, bring disgrace 

i pon \our kindred in the world below 

and here on earth. and soon the double lash 400 

of your mother's and lather's curse will drive you headlong 

out ot the country, blinded, with your cries 

1 leard everywhere, echoed by every hill 

in all cithaeron. then you will have learned 

the meaning of your marriage, learned in what harbor, 

after so fair a voyage, you were shipwrecked. 

and other horrors you could never dream of 

will teach you who vou are, will drag you down 

to the level of your children. heap \ our insults 

on creon and my message if you choose to. 410 

still no one ever will endure the weight 

of greater misery than will fall on you. 

oedipus: 

am i supposed to endure such talk as this, 
such talk from him? go, curse vou, go! be quick! 
tiresias: 

except for your summons i would never have come. 

oedipus: 

and i would never have sent for you so soon 
if i had known you would prove to be a fool. 
tiresias: 

yes. 1 have proved a fool— in your opinion. 
and yet your parents thought that 1 was wise. 

oedipus: 

what parents? wait! who was my father? tell me! 420 

tiresias: 

today will see your birth and your destruction. 

oedipus: 

vou cannot speak unless you speak in riddles! 

tiresias: 

and yet how brilliant you are in solving them! 

oedipus: 

you sneer at me for what has made me great. 

tiresias: 

the same good fortune that has ruined you. 
52 



oedipus the king 
oedipus: 

if i have saved the city, nothing else matters. 
tdiesias: 

in that case i will go. boy, take me home. 

oedipus: 

yes, let him take you. here, you are in the way. 

once you are gone, you will give no further trouble. 
tiresias: 

i will not go before i have said my say, 430 

indifferent to your black looks. you cannot harm me. 

and i say this: the man whom you have sought, 

whom you have threatened, whom vou have proclaimed 

the killer of king laius— he is here. 

now thought an alien, he shall prove to be 

a native theban, to his deep dismay. 

now he has eyesight, now his wealth is great; 

but he shall make his way to foreign soil 

blinded, in beggary, groping with a stick. 

in his own household he shall be shown to be 440 

the father of his children— and their brother, 

son to the woman who bore him— and her husband, 

the killer and the bedfellow of his father. 

go and consider this; and if you find 

that i have been mistaken, you can say 

that i have lost my skill in prophecy. 

exeunt oedipus and tiresias 
chorus: 

what man is this the god from the delphic rock denounces, 
whose deeds are too shameful to tell, whose murderous hands 
are red? 
let his feet be swifter now than hooves of horses racing 

the storm-clouds overhead. 450 

for zeus's son, apollo, leaps in anger upon him, 

armed with lightning to strike and slay, 
and the terrible fates, unflagging, relentless, 
follow the track of their prey. 

the words of the god have flashed from the peaks of snowy parnassus, 

commanding us all to seek this killer as yet unknown. 
deep in the tangled woods, through rocks and caves he is roaming 

like a savage bull, alone. 
on his lonely path he journeys, wretched, broken by sorrow, 

seeking to flee from the fate he fears; 460 

but the voice from the center of earth that doomed him 
inescapably rings in his ears. 



53 



sophocles 

dreadful, dreadful those words' we can neither approve nor 
deny them. 
shaken, confounded w ith fears, w e know not what to say. 
nothing is clear to us, nothing - what is to come tomorrow, 
or u hat is upon us today. 

it the prophet seeks revenge tor the unsolved murder of laius, 

\\ in is ( )edipus charged w ith crime? 

because some deep-rooted hate divides their rov.d houses? 
the houses ot laius and oedipus, son ot the king of corinth? 470 
there is none th.it we know of, now, or in ancient time. 

from '/cuss e\ es and apollo's no human secret is hidden; 

but man has no test tor truth, no measure his wit can devise. 
tiresias, indeed, excels in every art of his office, 

and yet we too may he wise. 
though oedipus stands accused, until he is proven guiltv 
we cannot blacken his name; 

for he showed his w isdom the day the winged maiden faced him. 
he triumphed in that ordeal, saved us, and won our affection. 

we can never believe he stooped to an act of shame. 480 

enter creon 
creon: 

thebans, i come here outraged and indignant, 

for 1 have learned that oedipus has accused me 

of dreadful crimes. if, in the present crisis, 

he thinks that i have wronged him in any way, 

wronged him in word or deed, then let my life 

come to a speedy close. i cannot bear 

the burden of such scandal. the attack 

ruins me utterly, if my friends, and you, 

and the whole city are to call me traitor. 
chorus: 

perhaps his words were only a burst of anger, 490 

and were not meant as a deliberate insult. 

creon: 

he did sav that i plotted with tiresias? 
and that the prophet lied at my suggestion? 
chorus: 

those were his words. i cannot guess his motive. 

creon: 

were his eves clear and steadv? was his mind 
unclouded, when he brought this charge against me? 
chorus: 

i cannot sav. to see what princes do 

is not our province. here comes the king himself. 

54 



oedipus the king 



enter oedipus 

oedipus: 

so you are here! what brought you to my door? 

impudence? insolence? you, my murderer! 500 

you, the notorious stealer of my crown! 

why did you hatch this plot? what kind of man, 

by heaven, what kind of man, could you have thought me? 

a coward or a fool? did you suppose 

i would not see your trickery take shape, 

or when i saw it, would not counter it? 

how stupid you were to reach for royal power 

without a troop of followers or rich friends! 

only a mob and money win a kingdom. 
creon: 

sir, let me speak. when you have heard my answer, 510 

you will have grounds on which to base your judgment. 
oedipus: 

i cannot follow all your clever talk. 

i only know that you are dangerous. 
creon: 

that is the issue. let me explain that first. 
oedipus: 

do not explain that you are true to me. 
creon: 

if you imagine that a blind self-will 

is strength of character, you are mistaken. 
oedipus: 

as you are, if you strike at your own house, 

and then expect to escape all punishment. 
creon: 

yes, you are right. that would be foolishness. 520 

but tell me, what have i done? how have i harmed you? 
oedipus: 

did you, or did you not, urge me to summon 

tiresias, that revered, that holy prophet? 
creon: 

yes. and i still think my advice was good. 
oedipus: 

then answer this: how long ago was laius— 
creon: 

laius! why how am i concerned with him? 
oedipus: 

how many years ago was laius murdered? 

creon: 

so many they cannot easily be counted. 
55 



sophocles 
01 mp! b 

and u .is 1 in.-m.is just as cunning then? 

t kl «>n 

as wise and honored .is he is today. 530 

id nii'i s 

at tli.it time did he ever mention me? 
( rbon: 

not in my hearing. 1 am sure of that. 

ol dipt s; 

and the murderer— a thorough search was made? 

i kl on: 

yes, certainly, but we discovered nothing. 

oediih s: 

then why did the man of h isdom hold his tongue? 
creon: 

i cannot say. guessing is not my habit. 
01 1'li'i s: 

( )ne thing at least you need not guess about. 

creon : 

what is it? if i know it, i will tell vou. 

oedipus: 

tiresias would not have said i murdered laius, 

if you two had not put your heads together. 540 

creon : 

you best know what he said. but now i claim 
the right to take my turn in asking questions. 

oedipus: 

very well, ask. you never can find me guilty. 
creon : 

then answer this: my sister is your wife? 

oedipus: 

i cannot deny that fact. she is my wife. 

creon: 

and in your rule she has an equal share? 
oedipus: 

she has no wish that goes unsatisfied. 
creon : 

and as the third i stand beside you both? 

oedipus: 

true. that position proves your treachery. 

creon : 

no. you would see, if vou thought the matter through 550 

as i have done. consider. who would choose 

kingship and all the terrors that go with it, 

if, with the same power, he could sleep in peace? 

i have no longing for a roval title 

rather than royal freedom. no, not i, 

56 



oedipus the king 

nor any moderate man. now i fear nothing. 
every request i make of you is granted, 
and yet as king i should have many duties 
that went against the grain. then how could rule 
be sweeter than untroubled influence? 560 

1 have not lost my mind. i want no honors 
except the ones that bring me solid good. 
now all men welcome me and wish me joy. 
now all your suitors ask to speak with me, 
knowing they cannot otherwise succeed. 
why should i throw away a life like this 
for a king's life? no one is treacherous 
who knows his own best interests. to conspire 
with other men, or to be false myself, 

is net my nature. put me to the test. 570 

first, go to delphi. ask if i told the truth 
about the oracle. then if you find 
i have had dealings with tiresias, kill me. 
my voice will echo yours in passing sentence. 
but base your verdict upon something more 
than mere suspicion. great injustice comes 
from random judgments that bad men are good 
and good men bad. to throw away a friend 
is, in effect, to throw away your life, 

the prize you treasure most. all this, in time, 580 

will become clear to you, for time alone 
proves a man's honesty, but wickedness 
can be discovered in a single day. 
chorus: 

sir, that is good advice, if one is prudent. 
hasty decisions always lead to danger. 

oedipus: 

when a conspiracy is quick in forming, 
i must move quickly to retaliate. 
if i sat still and let my enemy act, 
i would lose everything that he would gain. 
creon: 

so then, my banishment is what you want? 590 

oedipus: 

no, not your banishment. your execution. 



creon 



i think you are mad. oe.: i can protect myself. 
you should protect me also, oe.: you? a traitor? 
suppose you are wrong? oe.: i am the king. i rule. 



57 



sophocles 

s 

not it you rule unjustly, oe.: rhebes! hear that! 

ikha. 

1 hebes is my city too, .is w el] as yours. 

chor1 s 

mo more, do more, sirs' l [ere is queen jocasta. 
she comes in tunc to help make peace between you. 



enter jocasta 
jih \sta: 

oedipus! creon! how can you be so foolish? 

what! quarrel now about a private matter 600 

when the land is dying? you should be ashamed. 

come, oedipus, come in. creon, go home. 

you make a trivial problem too important. 

creon: 

sister, your husband has made dreadful threats. 
he claims the right to have me put to death 
or have me exiled. he need only choose. 

oedipus: 

yes. 1 have caught him at his treachery, 
plotting against the person of the king. 

creon: 

if 1 am guilty, may it be my fate 

to live in misery and to die accursed. 610 

jocasta: 

believe him, oedipus, believe him, spare him— 
i beg you by the gods— for his oath's sake, 
for my sake, for the sake of all men here. 

chorus: 

consent, o king. be gracious. hear us, we beg you. 
oedipus: what shall i hear? to what shall i consent? 
chorus: respect the evidence of creon's wisdom, 

respect the oath of innocence he has taken. 
oe.: you know what this means? ch.: yes. oe.: tell me again what 

you ask for. 
chorus: to yield, to relent. 

he is your friend and swears he is not guilty. 620 

do not act in haste, convicting him out of hand. 
oedipus: when you ask for this, vou ask for my destruction; 
you sentence me to death or to banishment. 
be sure that you understand. 



58 



chorus: 



oedipus the king 

no, by apollo, no! 
if such a thought has ever crossed my mind, 

then may i never find 
a friend to love me or a god to save; 
and may dark doom pursue me to the grave. 

my country perishes, and now new woe 
springs from your quarrel, one affliction more 
has come upon us, and my heart is sore. 



630 



oedipus: 



creon: 



oedipus: 



let him go free, even though that destroys me. 
i shall be killed, or exiled in disgrace. 
not his appeal but yours aroused my pity. 
i shall hate him always, no matter where he is. 

you go beyond all bounds when you are angry, 
and are sullen when you yield. natures like yours 
inflict their heaviest torments on themselves. 

go! go! leave me in peace! cr.: yes, i will go. 
you have not understood, but in the sight 
of all these men here i am innocent. 

exit creon 



640 



chorus: take the king with you, madam, to the palace. 
jocasta: when i have learned what happened, we will go. 
chorus: the king was filled with fear and blind suspicion. 

creon resented what he thought injustice, 
joe: both were at fault? ch.: both, joe: why was the king 

suspicious? 
chorus: do not seek to know. 

we have said enough. in a time of pain and trouble 
inquire no further. let the matter rest. 
oedipus: your well meant pleading turned me from my purpose, 
and now you come to this. you fall so low 
as to think silence best. 



650 



chorus: 



i say again, o king, 
no one except a madman or a fool 

would throw aside your rule. 
for you delivered us; your single hand 



59 



sophocles 

lifted the load from our beloved land. 

\\ hen we w ere mad « irh grief and suffering, 
in our extremity you found a way 660 

i sai e the cit) , .is \ ou \\ ill toda} . 

joi 131 \: 

hut tell nn\ oedipus, tell me, 1 beg \ ou, 
why you were so un) ielding in \ our anger. 
01 nii'i s: 

1 u ill, jocasta, for i honor you 

more than 1 do the ciders. it was creon's plotting. 

jocasi \: 

what do you mean? what was your accusation? 

oedipus: 

he says i am the murderer of king laius. 
jocasta: 

did he speak from first-hand knowledge or from hearsay? 

oedipus: 

he did not speak at all. his lips are pure. 

he bribed tiresias, and that scoundrel spoke. 670 

jocasta: 

then you can rid your mind of any fear 

that you are guiltv. listen to me. no mortal 

shares in the gods' foreknowledge. i can give you 

clear proof of that. there came once to king laius 

an oracle— i will not say from phoebus, 

but from his priest— saying it was his fate 

that he should be struck down by his own child, 

his child and mine. but laius, as we know, 

was killed by foreign robbers at a place 

where three roads came together. as for the child, 680 

when it was only three days old, its father 

pierced both its ankles, pinned its feet together, 

and then gave orders that it be abandoned 

on a wild mountainside. so in this case 

phoebus did not fulfill his oracle. the child 

was not its father's murderer, and laius 

was not the victim of the fate he feared, 

death at his son's hands, although just that fate 

was what the seer predicted. pay no heed 

to prophecies. whatever may be needful 690 

the god himself can show us easily. 

oedipus: 

what have you said, jocasta? what have you said? 
the past comes back to me. how terrible! 
tocasta: 

why do you start so? what has happened to you? 

60 



oedipus the king 
oedipus: 

it seemed to me— i thought you said that laius 
was struck down where three roads came together. 
jocasta: 

i did. that was the story, and still is. 

oedipus: 

where was it that this murder was committed? 

jocasta: 

in phocis, where the road from thebes divides, 

meeting the roads from daulia and delphi. 700 

oedipus: 

is this my fate? is this what the gods decreed? 

jocasta: 

what have i said that has so shaken you? 

oedipus: 

do not ask me yet. tell me about king laius. 
w t hat did he look like? was he young or old? 

jocasta: 

his build was not unlike yours. he was tall. 
his hair was just beginning to turn grey. 

oedipus: 

i cannot bear the thought that i called down 
a curse on my own head unknowingly. 

jocasta: 

what is it, oedipus? you terrify me! 

oedipus: 

i dread to think tiresias had clear eyesight; 710 

but tell me one thing more, and i will know. 

jocasta: 

and i too shrink, yet i will answer you. 

oedipus: 

how did he travel? with a few men only, 
or with his guards and servants, like a prince? 

jocasta: 

there were five of them in all, with one a herald. 
they had one carriage in which king laius rode. 

oedipus: 

it is too clear, too clear! who told you this? 

jocasta: 

the only servant who escaped alive. 

oedipus: 

and is he still here now, still in the palace? 
jocasta: 

no. when he. came home and found laius dead 720 

and you the reigning king, he pleaded with me 
to send him where the sheep were pasturing, 
as far as possible away from thebes. 

61 



sophocles 

aiul so i sent him. 1 it- u as a u orthy fellow 
\ml, it .1 slave (..in, deserved a greater favor. 

01 dip! s 

i hope it is possible to get him quickly. 

|i>< \si \: 

\ es, that is easy. why do you tit ant to sec him? 

oi diih s: 

because 1 am afraid, deadly afraid 
i li.it i have spoken more than i should have done. 

lot \m \: 

he sh.ill come. but oedipus, have i no right 730 

i learn what weighs so heavily on your heart? 
oi iui'l's: 

you shall learn everything, now that my fears 

1 la\ e grow n so great, tor \\ ho is dearer to me 

than you, jocasta? whom should i speak to sooner, 

when 1 am in such straits? king polybus 

of corinth was my father. merope, 

a dorian, was my mother. i myself 

was foremost among all the citizens, 

till something happened, strange, but hardly worth 

my feeling such resentment. as we sat 740 

one dav at dinner, a man who had drunk too much 

insulted me by saying i was not 

my father's son. in spite of being angrv, 

i managed to control myself. next day 

i asked my parents, who were both indignant 

that he had leveled such a charge against me. 

this was a satisfaction, yet the thing 

still rankled, for the rumor grew widespread. 

at last i went to delphi secretly. 

apollo gave no answer to my question 750 

but sent me off, anguished and terrified, 

with fearful prophecies that i was fated 

to be mv mother's husband, to bring forth 

children whom men could not endure to see, 

and to take my father's life. when i heard this 

i turned and fled, hoping to find at length 

some place where i would know of corinth only 

as a far distant land beneath the stars, 

some place where i would never have to see 

the infamies of this oracle fulfilled. 760 

and as i went on, i approached the spot 

at which vou tell me laius met his end. 

now this, jocasta, is the absolute truth. 

when i had come to where the three roads fork, 

62 



oedipus the king 

a herald met me, walking before a carriage, 
drawn by two colts, in which a man was seated, 
just as you said. the old man and the herald 
ordered me off the road with threatening gestures. 
then as the driver pushed me to one side, 

i struck him angrily. and seeing this, 770 

the old man, as i drew abreast, leaned out 
and brought his driver's two-pronged goad down hard 
upon my head. he paid a heavy price 
for doing that. with one blow of my staff 
i knocked him headlong from his chariot 
flat on his back. then every man of them 
i killed. now if the blood of laius flowed 
in that old stranger's veins, what mortal man 
could be more wretched, more accursed than i? 
i whom no citizen or foreigner 780 

mav entertain or shelter, i to whom 
no one may speak, i, i who must be driven 
from every door. no other man has cursed me, 
i have brought down this curse upon myself. 
the hands that killed him now pollute his bed! 
am i not vile, foul, utterly unclean? 
for i must fly and never see again 
my people or set foot in my own land, 
or else become the husband of my mother 

and put to death my father polybus, 790 

to whom i owe my life and my upbringing. 
men would be right in thinking that such things 
have been inflicted by some cruel fate. 
may the gods' high and holy majesty 
forbid that i should see that day. no! no! 
rather than be dishonored by a doom 
so dreadful may i vanish from the earth. 
chorus: 

sir, these are terrible things, but there is hope 
until you have heard what the one witness says. 

oedipus: 

that is the one remaining hope i have, 800 

to wait for the arrival of the shepherd. 
jocasta: 

and when he has arrived, what can he do? 

oedipus: 

he can do this. if his account agrees 
with yours, i stand acquitted of this crime. 

jocasta: 

was what i said of any consequence? 
63 



sophocles 

0] nii'i b: 

\ ou n.iui tus story was thai robbers killed 
king 1 .mis. ii he speaks ol the same number, 
1 hen 1 .im not the murderer. ( )ne man 

( annot be several men. but it lie says 

one traveler, single-handed, did the deed, 8io 

be) ond all doubt the evidence points to me. 

i am quite certain that was what he said. 
i le cannot change now, for the whole of thebes 
i i card ir, not i alone. in any case, 
1 ven supposing that his story shot/li 
be si hi aw hat different, he can never make 
laius's death fulfill the oracle. 
phoebus said plainly laius was to die 
at my son's hands. however, that poor child 
certainly did not kill him, for it died 820 

before its father. i would not waste my time 
in giving any thought to prophecy. 
oedipus: 

yes, you are right. and yet have someone sent 
to bring the shepherd here. make sure of this. 

jocasta : 

1 will, at once. come, oedipus, come in. 
i will do nothing that you disapprove of. 

exeunt oedipus and jocasta 



chorus: 

may piety and reverence mark my actions; 

may every thought be pure through all my days. 
may those great laws whose dwelling is in heaven 

approve my conduct with their crown of praise: 830 

offspring of skies that overarch olympus, 

laws from the loins of no mere mortal sprung, 
unslumbering, unfailing, unforgetting, 

filled with a godhead that is ever young. 

pride breeds the tyrant. insolent presumption, 

big with delusive wealth and false renown, 
once it has mounted to the highest rampart 

is headlong hurled in utter ruin down. 
but pour out all thy blessings, lord apollo, 

thou who alone hast made and kept us great, 840 

on all whose sole ambition is unselfish, 

who spend themselves in service to the state. 

64 



oedipus the king 

let that man be accursed who is proud, 
in act unscrupulous, in thinking base, 

whose knees in reverence have never bowed, 
in whose hard heart justice can find no place, 

whose hands profane life's holiest mysteries, 
how can he hope to shield himself for long 

from the gods' arrows that will pierce him through? 
if evil triumphs in such ways as these, 850 

why should we seek, in choric dance and song, 
to give the gods the praise that is their due? 

i cannot go in full faith as of old, 
to sacred delphi or olympian vale, 

unless men see that what has been foretold 
has come to pass, that omens never fail. 

all-ruling zeus, if thou art king indeed, 
put forth thy majesty, make good thy word, 

faith in these fading oracles restore! 
to priest and prophet men pay little heed; 860 

hymns to apollo are no longer heard; 
and all religion soon will be no more. 

enter jocasta 
jocasta: 

elders of thebes, i thought that i should visit 

the altars of the gods to offer up 

these wreaths i carry and these gifts of incense. 

the king is overanxious, overtroubled. 

he is no longer calm enough to judge 

the present by the lessons of the past, 

but trembles before anyone who brings 

an evil prophecy. i cannot help him. 870 

therefore, since thou art nearest, bright apollo, 

i bring these offerings to thee. o, hear me! 

deliver us from this defiling curse. 

his fear infects us all, as if we were 

sailors who saw their pilot terrified. 

enter messenger 
messenger: 

sirs, i have come to find king oedipus. 
where is his palace, can you tell me that? 
or better yet, where is the king himself? 

chorus: 

stranger, the king is there, within his palace. 

this is the queen, the mother of his children. 880 

65 



sophocles 
\h m nger! 

may all the gods be good to you and yours! 

.madam, vou arc a lady richly blessed. 
jocasta: 

and may the gods requite your courtesy. 

hut w hat request or message do you bring us? 

ml sm \(.l k: 

good tidings for your husband and your household. 
j<)< \m a: 

what is your news? what country do you come from? 
ml bsj m.i k: 

from corinth. and the news i bring will surely 

give you great pleasure— and perhaps some pain. 

jocasta: 

what message can be good and bad at once? 

ml ssl m.i'r: 

the citizens of corinth, it is said, 890 

have chosen oedipus to be their king. 

jocasta: 

what do you mean? their king is polybus. 

messenger: 

no, madam. polybus is dead and buried. 

jocasta: 

what! dead! the father of king oedipus? 

messenger: 

if i speak falsely, let me die myself. 
jocasta (to attendant): 

go find the king and tell him this. be quick! 

what does an oracle amount to now? 

this is the man whom oedipus all these years 

has feared and shunned to keep from killing him, 

and now we find he dies a natural death! 900 



enter oedipus 

oedipus: 

my dear jocasta, why have you sent for me? 

jocasta: 

listen to this man's message, and then tell me 
what faith you have in sacred oracles. 

oedipus: 

where does he come from? what has he to say? 

jocasta: 

he comes from corinth and has this to say: 
the king, your father, polvbus is dead. 
oedipus (to messknger): 

my father! tell me that again yourself. 

66 



oedipus the king 
messenger: 

i will say first what you first want to know. 
you may be certain he is dead and gone . 

oedipus: 

how did he die? by violence or sickness? 910 

messenger: 

the scales of life tip easily for the old. 

oedipus: 

that is to say he died of some disease. 

messenger: 

yes, of disease, and merely of old age. 

oedipus: 

hear that, jocasta! why should anyone 

give heed to oracles from the pythian shrine, 

or to the birds that shriek above our heads? 

they prophesied that i must kill my father. 

but he is dead; the earth has covered him. 

and i am here, i who have never raised 

my hand against him— unless he died of grief, 920 

longing to see me. then i might be said 

to have caused his death. but as they stand, at least, 

the oracles have been swept away like rubbish. 

they are with polybus in hades, dead. 

jocasta: 

long ago, oedipus, i told you that. 

oedipus: 

you did, but i was blinded by my terror. 
jocasta: 

now you need take these things to heart no longer. 

oedipus: 

but there is still my mother's bed to fear. 
jocasta: 

why should you be afraid? chance rules our lives, 

and no one can foresee the future, no one. 930 

we live best when we live without a purpose 

from one day to the next. forget your fear 

of marrying your mother. that has happened 

to many men before this in their dreams. 

we find existence most endurable 

when such things are neglected and forgotten. 

oedipus: 

that would be true, jocasta, if my mother 
w t ere not alive; but now vour eloquence 
is not enough to give me reassurance. 
jocasta: 

and yet your father's death is a great comfort. 940 

67 



sophocles 

hi mi'i s 

v es, but i cannot rest while she is living. 

ml bo n'.i k. 

sir, « ill you tell me who it is vou fear? 
hi nii'i s: 

queen merope\ the wife of polybus. 

ml b81 s<.i k: 

what is so terrible about the queen? 

i>l dip! s: 

a dreadful prophecy the gods have sent us. 

ml ssl nger: 

are vou forbidden to speak of it, or not? 
01 niih s: 

it may be told. the lord apollo said 
1 li.it i was doomed to marrv my own mother, 
and shed my father's blood with my own hands. 
and so tor years i have stayed away from corinth, 950 

my native land— a fortunate thing for me, 
though it is very sweet to see one's parents. 

messengir: 

was that the reason you have lived in exile? 

oedipus: 

yes, for i feared my mother and my father. 

messenger: 

then since my journey was to wish you well, 
let me release vou from your fear at once. 

oedipus: 

that would deserve my deepest gratitude. 

messengkr: 

sir, i did come here with the hope of earning 
some recompense when you had gotten home. 

oedipus: 

no. i will never again go near my home. 960 

messenger: 

son, son! you know nothing. that is clear— 

oedipus: 

what do you mean, old friend? tell me, i beg you. 
messenger: 

if that is why you dare not come to corinth. 

oedipus: 

1 fear apollo's word would be fulfilled. 
mi ssenger: 

that you would be polluted through your parents? 

oedipus: 

yes, ves! my life is haunted by that horror. 
messenger: 

you have no reason to be horrified. 

68 



oedipus the king 
oedipus: 

i have no reason! why? they are my parents. 
messenger: 

no. you are not the son of polybus. 

oedipus: 

what did you say? polybus not my father? 970 

messenger: 

he was as much your father as i am. 

oedipus: 

how can that be— my father like a stranger? 

messenger: 

but he was not your father, nor am i. 

oedipus: 

if that is so, why was i called his son? 

messenger: 

because he took you as a gift, from me. 

oedipus: 

yet even so, he loved me like a father? 

messenger: 

yes, for he had no children of his own. 

oedipus: 

and when you gave me, had you bought or found me? 

messenger: 

i found you in the glens of mount cithaeron. 
oedipus: 

what could have brought you to a place like that? 980 

messenger: 

the flocks of sheep that i was tending there. 

oedipus: 

you went from place to place, hunting for work? 
messenger: 

i did, my son. and yet i saved your life. 
oedipus: 

how? was i suffering when vou took me up? 

messenger: 

your ankles are the proof of what you suffered. 

oedipus: 

that misery! why do you speak of that? 

messenger: 

your feet were pinned together, and i freed them. 
oedipus: 

yes. from my cradle i have borne those scars. 
messenger: 

they are the reason for your present name. 

oedipus: 

who did it? speak! my mother, or my father? 990 

69 



sophocles 

i m.i k 

( )nl\ the man u ho gave you to me knows. 

ol dip! b 

then you yourself did not discover me. 

\li ssi ngj i<: 

no. a man put you in my arms, some shepherd. 
01 dipt s: 

do j ou know who he u as : can you describe him? 
mi ssi ng1 k: 

lie u as, 1 think, one of the slaves of laius. 
oedipl s: 

the laius who was once the king of thebes? 
mi ssi n(.i r: 

yes, that is right. king laius was his master. 

oedipus: 

how could i see him? is he still alive? 
messenger: 

one of his fellow thebans would know that. 

oedipus: 

does anyone here know who this shepherd is? iooo 

has anyone ever seen him in the city 
or in the fields? tell me. now is the time 
to solve this mystery once and for all. 
chorus: 

sir, i believe the shepherd whom he means 
is the same man you have already sent for. 
the queen, perhaps, knows most about the matter. 

oedipus: 

do you, jocasta? you know the man we summoned. 
is he the man this messenger spoke about? 
jocasta: 

why do vou care? what difference can it make? 

to ask is a waste of time, a waste of time! ioio 

oedipus: 

i cannot let these clues slip from my hands. 

i must track down the secret of my birth. 
jocasta: 

oedipus, oedipus! by all the gods, 

if you set any value on your life, 

give up this search! i have endured enough. 
oedipus: 

do not be frightened. even if my mother 

should prove to be a slave, and born of slaves, 

this would not touch the honor of your name. 
jocasta: 

listen, i beg you! listen! do not do this! 

70 



oedipus the king 
oedipus! 

i cannot fail to bring the truth to light. 1020 

jocasta: 

i know my way is best for you, i know it! 
oedipus: 

i know your best way is unbearable. 
jocasta: 

may you be saved from learning who you are! 
oedipus: 

go, someone. bring the shepherd. as for her, 

let her take comfort in her noble birth. 
jocasta: 

you are lost! lost! that is all i can call you now! 

that is all i will ever call you, ever again! 

exit jocasta 

chorus: 

what wild grief, sir, has driven the queen away? 

evil, i fear, will follow from her silence, 

a storm of sorrow that will break upon us. 1030 

oedipus: 

then let it break upon us. i must learn 

my parentage, whatever it may be. 

the queen is proud, far prouder than most women, 

and feels herself dishonored by my baseness. 

but i shall not be shamed. i hold myself 

the child of fortune, giver of all good. 

she brought me forth. and as i lived my life, 

the months, my brothers, watched the ebb and flow 

of my well-being. never could i prove 

false to a lineage like that, or fail 1040 

to bring to light the secret of my birth. 
chorus: 

may phoebus grant that i prove a true prophet! 
my heart foreknows what the future will bring: 

at tomorrow's full moon we shall gather, in chorus 
to hail cithaeron, to dance and sing 

in praise of the mountain by oedipus honored, 
theban nurse of our theban king. 



what long-lived nymph was the mother who bore you? 

what god whom the joys of the hills invite 
was the god who begot you? pan? or apollo? 1050 

or hermes, lord of cylene's height? 
or on helicon's slope did an oread place you 

in bacchus's arms for his new delight? 

71 



sophocles 
oedipt s 

mlilcrs, i think 1 see the shepherd coming 

\\ hom we have sent for. since 1 aever met him, 

1 am not sure, \ et he seems old enough, 

and my own slaves are the men bringing him. 
but you, perhaps, know more of tins than 1, 

if an) >'t" you h.n e seen the man before. 

(. hort s 

\ cs. it is he. i know him, the king's shepherd, 1060 

as true a slave as l.iius ever had. 



enter shepherd 
hi dipus: 

1 srarr w ith you, corinthian. is this man 

the one \ ou spoke of? mi ss.: sir, he stands before you. 

oedipus: 

now \ ou, old man. come, look me in the face. 
answ er my questions. you were the slave of laius? 

shephl rd: 

\ es, but not bought. i grew up in his household. 
oedipls: 

what was the work that you were given to do? 
sin i'herd: 

sheep-herding. i have always been a shepherd. 

oedipus: 

where was it that vou took vour sheep to pasture? 

shi i'herd: 

on mount cithaeron, or the fields near by. 1070 

oedipus: 

do you remember seeing this man there? 

shepherd: 

what was he doing? what man do vou mean? 

oedipus: 

that man beside you. have you ever met him? 
shepherd: 

no, i think not. i cannot recollect him. 

messenger: 

sir, i am not surprised, but i am sure 

that i can make the past come back to him. 

he cannot have forgotten the long summers 

we grazed our sheep together by cithaeron, 

he with two flocks, and i with one— three years, 

from spring to autumn. then, for the winter months, 1080 

i used to drive mv sheep to their own fold, 

and he drove his back to the fold of laius. 

is that right? did it happen as i said? 

72 



oedipus the king 
shepherd: 

yes, you are right, but it was long ago. 
messenger: 

well then, do you remember vou once gave me 

an infant boy to bring up as my own? 
shepherd: 

what do you mean? why do you ask me that? 

messenger: 

because the child you gave me stands before you. 
shepherd: 

will vou be quiet? curse you! will vou be quiet? 
oedipus (to shepherd): 

you there! you have no reason to be angry. 1090 

you are far more to blame in this than he. 
shepherd: 

what have i done, my lord? what have i done? 

oedipus: 

you have not answered. he asked about the boy. 
shepherd: 

sir, he knows nothing, nothing at all about it. 

oedipus: 

and you say nothing. we must make you speak. 
shepherd: 

my lord, i am an old man! do not hurt me! 
oedipus (to guards): 

one of you tie his hands behind his back. 
shepherd: 

why do you want to know these fearful things? 
oedipus: 

did you, or did you not, give him that child? 
shepherd: 

i did. i wish that i had died instead. 1100 

oedipus: 

you will die now, unless you tell the truth. 
shepherd: 

and if i speak, i will be worse than dead. 
oedipus: 

you seem to be determined to delay. 
shepherd: 

no. no! i told you that i had the child. 
oedipus: 

where did it come from? was it yours or not? 
shepherd: 

no, it was not mine. someone gave it to me. 
oedipus: 

some citizen of thebes? who was it? who? 

73 



sophocles 

sin rami: 

oh' do nor ask me that' not that, my lord! 

hi mi'l s 

if 1 must ask once more, voil are a dead man. 

shi l-hi kl> 

the child came from the household of king laius. mo 

oedii'l s 

was it a sla\ e's child? or of royal hlood? 
sin phebd: 

1 stand on the very hrink of speaking horrors. 

oedii'l s: 

and i of hearing horrors— but i must. 
mu pherd: 

then hear. the child was said to be the king's. 
you can best learn about this from the queen. 

oedipus: 

the queen! she gave it to you? shep.: yes, my lord. 

oedipus: 

why did she do that? shep.: so that i should kill it. 

oedipus: 

her own child? shep.: yes, she feared the oracles. 

oedipus: 

what oracles? shep.: that it must kill its father. 

oedipus: 

then why did you give it up to this old man? 1120 

shepherd: 

i pitied the poor child. i thought the man 
would take it with him back to his own country. 
he saved its life only to have it come 
at last to this. if you should be the man 
he says you are, you were born miserable. 

oedipus: 

all true! all, all made clear! let me no longer 

look on the light of day. 1 am known now 

for what i am— i, cursed in being born, 

cursed in my marriage, cursed in the blood i shed. 

exit oedipus 

chorus: 

men are of little worth. their brief lives last 1 1 30 

a single daw 
thev cannot hold elusive pleasure fast; 

it melts away. 
all laurels wither; all illusions fade; 
hopes have been phantoms, shade on air-built shade, 

since time began. 

74 



oedipus the king 

your fate, o king, your fate makes manifest 
life's wretchedness. we can call no one blessed, 
no, not one man. 

victorious, unerring, to their mark 1 140 

your arrows flew. 
the sphinx with her curved claws, her riddle dark, 

your wisdom slew. 
by this encounter you preserved us all, 
guarding the land from death's approach, our tall, 

unshaken tower. 
from that time, oedipus, we held you dear, 
great king of our great thebes, without a peer 

in place and power. 

but now what sadder story could be told? 1 150 

a life of triumph utterly undone! 
what fate could be more grievous to behold? 

father and son 
both found a sheltering port, a place of rest, 

on the same breast. 
father and son both harvested the yield 

of the same bounteous field. 
how could that earth endure such dreadful wrong 

and hold its peace so long? 

all-seeing time condemned your marriage lot; 1160 

in ways you least expected bared its shame- 
union wherein begetter and begot 

were both the same. 
this loud lament, these tears that well and flow, 

this bitter woe 
are for the day you rescued us, o king, 

from our great suffering; 
for the new life and happiness you gave 
you drag down to the grave. 

enter second messenger 

second messenger: 

most honored elders, princes of the land, 11 70 

if you are true-born thebans and still love 
the house of labdacus, then what a burden 
of sorrow you must bear, what fearful things 
you must now hear and see! there is no river- 
no, not the stream of ister or of phasis— 
that could wash clean this house from the pollution 

75 



so 1* ii o c l e s 

it hides within ir or will soon bring forth: 
i [ori ible deeds not done in ignorance, 
but done deliberatel) . 1 he crudest evils 
are those that u e embrace with open eyes. 1180 

choki 5: 

those we already know of are enough 

to claim our tears. what more have \ otl to tell? 
si ( ond \u ssi ng1 r: 

it may be briefly told. the queen is dead. 

( ho&x s: 

poor woman! oh, poor woman! how? what happened? 

second ml ssi \ ( ,| i<: 

she killed herself. you have been spared the worst, 

not being witnesses. vet you shall learn 

what her fate was, so far as i remember. 

when she came in, almost beside herself, 

clutching her hair with both her hands, she rushed 

straight to her bedroom and slammed shut the doors i ioo 

behind her, screaming the name of laius— 

laius long dead, but not her memory 

of their own child, the son who killed his father, 

the son by whom his mother had more children. 

she cursed the bed in which she had conceived 

husband by husband, children by her child, 

a dreadful double bond. beyond this much 

i do not know the manner of her death, 

for with a great crv oedipus burst in, 

preventing us from following her fate 1200 

to its dark end. on him our gaze was fixed, 

as in a frenzy he ran to and fro, 

calling: 'give me a sword! give me a sword! 

w t here is that wife who is no wife, that mother, 

that soil where i was sower and was sown?' 

and as he raved, those of us there did nothing, 

some more than mortal power directed him. 

with a wild shriek, as though he had some sign, 

he hurled himself against the double doors, 

forcing the bars out of their loosened sockets, 12 10 

and broke into his room. there was the queen, 

hanged in a noose, still swinging back and forth. 

when he saw this, the king cried out in anguish, 

untied the knotted cord in which she swung, 

and laid the wretched woman on the ground. 

what happened then was terrible to see. 

he tore the golden brooches from her robe, 

lifted them up as high as he could reach, 

76 



oedipus the king 

and drove them with all his strength into his eyes, 
shrieking, 'no more, no more shall my eyes see 1220 

the horrors of my life— what i have done, 
what i have suffered. they have looked too long 
on those whom they ought never to have seen. 
they never knew those whom i longed to see. 
blind, blind! let them be blind!' with these wild words 
he stabbed and stabbed his eyes. at every blow, 
the dark blood dyed his beard, not sluggish drops, 
but a great torrent like a shower of hail. 
a two-fold punishment of two-fold sin 

broke on the heads of husband and of wife. 1230 

their happiness was once true happiness, 
but now disgrace has come upon them, death, 
sorrow, and ruin, every earthly ill 
that can be named. not one have they escaped. 
chorus: 

is he still suffering? has he found relief? 

second messenger: 

he calls for someone to unbar the doors 

and show him to all thebes, his father's killer, 

his mother's— no, i cannot say the word; 

it is unholy, horrible. he intends 

to leave the country, for his staying here 

would bring down his own curse upon his house. 1240 

he has no guide and no strength of his own. 

his pain is unendurable. this too 

you will see. they are drawing back the bars. 

the sight is loathsome and yet pitiful. 



enter oedipus 
chorus: 

hideous, hideous! i have seen nothing so dreadful, 
ever before! 
i can look no more. 
oedipus, oedipus! what madness has come upon you? 
what malignant fate 

has leaped with its full weight, 1250 

has struck you down with an irresistible fury, 
and born you off as its prey? 

poor wretch! there is much that i yearn 
to ask of you, much i would learn; 
but i cannot. the sight of you fills me with horror! 
i shudder and turn away. 



77 



sophocles 

i>i mia b: 

oh, oh! what pain! 1 cannot rest in my anguish! 

where am i? where? 
where are my words? they die away as i speak them. 

into thin air. 1260 

\\ hat is my fate to be? 
chorus: a fate too fearful tor men to hear of, for men to see. 



oedipls: lost! overwhelmed by the rush of unspeakable darkness! 
it smothers me in its cloud. 
the pain of my eyes is piercing. 
the thought of my sins, the horrors that i have committed, 
racks me without relief. 
1 horx s: no wonder you surfer, oedipus, no wonder you cry aloud 
under your double burden of pain and grief. 



oedipus: 



chorus: 



my friend, my friend! how steadfast you are, how ready 1270 

to help me in my great need! 

i feel your presence beside me. 
blind as i am, i know your voice in the blackness 

of my long-lasting night. 
how could vou put out your eyes, still another infamous deed? 
what god, what demon, induced you to quench their light? 



oedipus: it was apollo, mv friends, who brought me low, 

apollo who crushed me beneath this unbearable burden; 

but it was my hand, mine, that struck the blow. 
why should i see? what sight could have given me pleasure? 
chorus: these things are as you sav. 

oedipus: what is there now to love? what greeting can cheer me? 
lead me away, 
quicklv, quickly! o lead me out of the country 

to a distant land! i am bevond redemption 
accursed, bevond hope lost, the one man living 
whom all the gods most hate. 
chorus: would we had never heard of your existence, 

your fruitless wisdom and your wretched fate. 



oedipus: mv curses be upon him, whoever freed 1290 

mv feet from the cruel fetters, there on the mountain, 

who restored me from death to life, a thankless deed. 
aly death would have saved my friends and me from anguish. 

78 



oedipus the king 

chorus: i too would have had it so. 

oedipus: then would i never have been my father's killer. 
now all men know 
that i am the infamous son who defiled his mother, 

that i shared the bed of the father who gave me being. 
and if there is sorrow beyond any mortal sorrow, 

i have brought it upon my head. 1300 

chorus: i cannot say that you have acted wisely. 

alive and blind? you would be better dead. 



oedipus: 

give me no more advice, and do not tell me 

that i was wrong. what i have done is best. 

for if i still had eyesight when i went 

down to the underworld, how could i bear 

to see my father and my wretched mother? 

after the terrible wrong i did them both, 

it would not have been punishment enough 

if i had hanged myself. or do you think 13 10 

that i could find enjoyment in the sight 

of children born as mine were born? no! no! 

nor in the sight of thebes with its towered walls 

and sacred statues of the gods. for i— 

who is so wretched?— i, the foremost theban, 

cut myself off from this by my own edict 

that ordered everyone to shun the man 

polluting us, the man the gods have shown 

to be accursed, and of the house of laius. 

once i laid bare my shame, could i endure 1320 

to look my fellow-citizens in the face? 

never! never! if i had found some way 

of choking off the fountain of my hearing, 

i would have made a prison of my body, 

sightless and soundless. it would be sweet to live 

beyond the reach of sorrow. oh, cithaeron! 

why did you give me shelter rather than slay me 

as soon as i was given to you? then 

no one would ever have heard of my begetting. 

polybus, corinth, and the ancient house 1330 

i thought mv forebears'! you reared me as a child. 

my fair appearance covered foul corruption, 

i am impure, born of impurity. 

oh, narrow crossroad where the three paths meet! 

secluded valley hidden in the forest, 

79 



s o 1> iioclf.s 

you that drank up my blood, my father's blood 
shed by niv hands, do you remember all 
[ did for you to see: do you remember 

\\ h.it else- 1 did when i came here to thebes? 

oh marriage rites! by which i was begotten, x 34° 

you then brought forth children by your own child, 

creating foulest blood-relationship: 

an interchange of fathers, brothers, sons, 

brides, wives, and mothers— the most monstrous shame 

\1 in tan be guilty of. i should not speak 

of what should not be done. by all the gods, 

1 lide me, 1 beg you, hide me quickly somewhere 

bar, far aw av. put me to death or throw me 

into the sea, out of \ our sight forever. 

come to me, friends, pity my wretchedness. '35° 

let your hands touch me. hear me. do not fear, 

my curse can rest on no one but myself. 



chorus: 

crcon is coming. he is the one to act 

on your requests, or to help you with advice. 

he takes your place as our sole guardian. 

oedipus: 

creon! what shall 1 say? i cannot hope 

that he will trust me now, when my past hatred 

has proved to be so utterly mistaken. 



enter creon 



creon: 



i have not come to mock you, oedipus, 

or to reproach you for any evil-doing. 1360 

(to attendants) you there. if you have lost all your respect 

for men, revere at least the lord apollo, 

whose flame supports all life. do not display 

so nakedly pollution such as this, 

evil that neither earth nor holy rain 

nor light of day can welcome. take him in, 

take him in, quickly. piety demands 

that only kinsmen share a kinsman's woe. 

oedipus: 

creon, since you have proved my fears were groundless, 
since you have shown such magnanimity 1370 

to one so vile as i, grant my petition. 
i ask you not for my sake but your own. 

80 



oedipus the king 
creon: 

what is it that you beg so urgently? 
oedipus: 

drive me away at once. drive me far off. 

let me not hear a human voice again. 
creon: 

i have delayed only because i wished 

to have the god reveal to me my duty. 
oedipus: 

but his command was certain: put to death 

the unholy parricide. and i am he. 
creon: 

true. but as things are now, it would be better 1 380 

to find out clearly what we ought to do. 
oedipus: 

an oracle for a man so miserable? 
creon: 

yes. even you will now believe the god. 
oedipus: 

i will. creon, i charge you with this duty. 

accept it, i entreat you. give to her 

who lies within such burial as you wish, 

for she belongs to you. you will perform 

the proper obsequies. but as for me, 

let not my presence doom my father's city, 

but send me to the hills, to mount cithaeron, 1390 

my mountain, which my mother and my father 

chose for my grave. so will i die at last 

by the decree of those who sought to slay me. 

and yet i know i will not die from sickness 

or anything else. i was preserved from death 

to meet some awful, some mysterious end. 

my own fate does not matter, only my children's. 

creon, my sons need give you no concern, 

for they are men, and can find anywhere 

a livelihood. but creon, my two girls! 1400 

how lost, how pitiable! they always ate 

their daily bread with me, at my own table, 

and had their share of everything i touched. 

take care of them! o creon, take care of them! 

and one thing more— if i could only touch them 

and with them weep. o prince, prince, grant me this! 

grant it, o noble creon! if i touched them, 

i could believe i saw them once again. 



81 



sophocles 



enter ismim. and antigon] 



\\ h.it' do i hear inv daughters? hear them sobbing? 

has creon had pity on me? has he sent them, 1410 

\1\ children, my two darlings? is it true? 



1 reon: 



\ es. 1 have had them brought. i knew how much 
you used t>> love them, how you love them still. 
01 dipus: 

may the gods bless you, creon, for this kindness; 

and may they guard vou better on your journey 

than they have guarded me. children, where are you? 

come to your brother's hands, the hands that made 

your father's clear eyes into what these are— 

your father, who saw nothing and knew nothing, 

begetting you where he had been conceived. 1420 

i cannot see you, but i weep for you, 

weep for the bitter lives that you must lead 

henceforward. never, never will you go 

to an assembly with the citizens, 

or to a festival, and take your part. 

you will turn back in tears. and when vou come 

to the full bloom of womanhood, what man 

will run the risk of bringing on himself 

your shame, my daughters, and vour children's shame? 

is there one evil, one, that is not ours? 1430 

'your father killed his father; he begot 

children of his own mother; she who bore vou 

bore him as well.' these are the taunts, the insults 

that you will hear. who, then, will marry you? 

no one, my children. clearlv it is your fate 

to waste away in barren maidenhood. 

creon, creon, their blood flows in your veins. 

you are the only father left to them; 

they have lost both their parents. do not let them 

wander away, unmarried, destitute, 1440 

as miserable as i. have pity on them, 

so young, so utterly forlorn, so helpless 

except for vou. you are kind-hearted. touch me 

to tell me that i have your promise. children, 

there is so much, so much that i would say, 

if you were old enough to understand it, 

but now i only teach vou this one prayer: 

may i be given a place in which to live, 

and may my life be happier than my father's. 

82 



oedipus the king 
creon: 

come, come with us. have done with further woe. 1450 

oe.: obedience is hard, cr.: no good in life endures beyond 

its season. 
oe.: do you know why i yield? cr.: when i have heard your 

reason i will know. 
oe.: you are to banish me. cr.: the gods alone can grant you 

that entreaty. 
oe.: i am hated by the gods, cr.: then their response to you 

will not be slow. 
oe.: so you consent to this? cr.: i say no more than i have 

said already. 
oe.: come, then, lead me away, cr.: not with your children. 

you must let them go. 
oe.: creon, not that, not that! cr.: you must be patient. 

nothing can restore 
your old dominion. you are king no more. 

exeunt creon, oedipus, ismene, and antigone 



chorus: 



behold him, thebans: oedipus, great and wise, 
who solved the famous riddle. this is he 1460 

whom all men gazed upon with envious eyes, 
who now is struggling in a stormy sea, 

crushed by the billows of his bitter woes. 
look to the end of mortal life. in vain 

we say a man is happy, till he goes 
beyond life's final border, free from pain. 



83 



c-ampvis ^t* (^ol&rmas 



characters in the play 
oedipl's, former king of thebes 

antigone ) . . , , 

> his daughters 

ism en e ) * 

polyneices, his so?l 

theseus, king of athens 

creon, king of thebes, brother of jocasta, the wife and 
mother of oedipus 

countryman, a native of colonus 

messenger 

chorus, elders of colonus 

attendants 



oedipus at colonus 

scene: the countryside. in the background there is a thick 
grove of trees, on the edge of which stands a large rock. 



enter oedipus in rags, guided by antigone 

oedipus: 

antigone, where is your blind old father? 

still in the countryside, or near some city? 

who is it that will give his grudging gifts, 

his scanty hospitality, today 

to wandering oedipus? i ask for little. 

though i get less than little, it is enough; 

for hardship and the years that have been my lot, 

the long years, and nobility of mind 

have taught me patience. daughter, if you can see 

a place of rest, either unhallowed ground 10 

or sacred grove, help me to find a seat. 

for we must ask some citizen where we are, 

and we must do whatever we are bidden. 
antigone: 

father, the walls and towers that i see 

guarding the city seem to be far away, 

and this spot where we stand is surely sacred. 

for laurels, vines, and olives grow profusely, 

and deep within, a throng of nightingales 

pour out their eloquence. so rest here, father. 

there is a natural seat here in the rock. 20 

you have come a long, long way, and you are old. 
oedipus: 

then seat the blind man and take care of him. 
antigone: 

if time can teach me, i have learned that lesson. 
oedipus: 

where have we come to, daughter? can you tell me? 
antigone: 

athens i know well, but this place is strange. 

oedipus: 

you say what everyone we met has said. 
87 



sophocles 

an nooni 

what shall i do? go find out where we are? 
01 dipu8: 

\ cs, it you think there arc people living here. 

an iii. on l : 

sorely there are. and pet i need not go, 

for i see someone now, not iar away. 30 

oedipi s: 

coining in this direction? coining near? 
an rigonl : 

i le has come close to us already. say 

whatever vou think is best, for he is here. 



enter countryman 
oedipus: 

stranger, this girl has eyes for both of us. 
hearing from her of your most timely coming 
to give us aid in our perplexity— 

countryman: 

speak not a word more. let your story wait 
till you have come from that forbidden ground. 
oedipus: 

forbidden ground? to which god is it sacred? 

countryman: 

holy and unapproachable, it belongs 40 

to the terrible daughters of darkness and of earth. 

oedipus: 

whose awful name am i to hear and pray to? 

countryman: 

we call them the eumenides, the all-seeing, 
the goddesses benignant. but elsewhere 
men do them honor under other names. 
oedipus: 

may they receive their suppliant graciously! 
this is the seat that i will never leave. 

countryman: 

what do you mean? oe.: i have been given a sign. 

countryman: 

i dare not act mvself and drive you out. 

the citizens must sanction what i do. 50 

oedipus: 

for the love of all the gods, sir, i entreat you 
not to refuse a wanderer such as i, 
not to refuse to tell me what i ask. 

countryman: 

speak. you will find that i shall not refuse you. 
88 



oedipus at colonus 
oedipus: 

then what is the name of the place that we have entered? 
countryman: 

you shall hear everything that i can tell you. 

the whole vicinity is hallowed ground, 

held by august poseidon and the titan, 

prometheus the fire-bringing god. the spot 

on which you stand is the mainstay of athens, 60 

known as the brazen threshold of the land. 

the neighboring fields claim for their founding lord 

colonus the horseman, and the people bear 

his name as well. now you may understand 

this is a country honored not in legend 

but in the hearts of its inhabitants. 

oedipus: 

then it is true that men are living here? 
countryman: 

it is. they are the namesakes of the hero. 

oedipus: 

have they a king? or do they rule themselves? 

countryman: 

the city's king is the ruler of this region. 70 

oedipus: 

who is this man, sovereign in word and act? 

countryman: 

theseus, the son of aegeus, king before him. 

oedipus: 

and could a messenger be sent to him? 
countryman: 

what should the man say? urge the king to come? 

oedipus: 

by a small service the king will profit greatly. 

countryman: 

how, in your blindness, can you bring him profit? 

oedipus: 

in every word i utter there shall be vision. 

countryman: 

sir, let me teach you how to save yourself, 

for it appears to me your birth is noble 

in spite of your ill-fortune. stay where you are, 80 

where you first showed yourself, until i tell 

the people of colonus, not of athens, 

all that has happened here. they will decide 

whether you are to leave or to remain. 

exit countryman 
oedipus: 

tell me, antigone, is the stranger gone? 
89 



sophocles 

amii.i.sl : 

yes, he is gone. say what you will in peace, 
\ mi may be sure that only i am near. 
oedipus: 

queens, o goddesses, terrible to behold! 
since my first refuge was this shrine of yours, 

(.'lose not vout hearts tu phoebus and to me. 90 

when by his oracle the god proclaimed 
the many evils that have come upon me, 
this too he promised: that after many years 

1 should at length attain my final rest, 
rest from mv sorrow and my weariness, 

when in some land that made a stranger welcome 

i found the shrine of the dread goddesses; 

and that my presence in the land would bring 

a blessing upon those who sheltered me, 

but upon those who banished me a curse. 100 

the god forewarned that signs of this would come, 

perhaps in earthquake, thunder, or the flash 

of zeus's lightning. now it is clear to me 

that in my journey some sure prompting led me 

on to this grove— your prompting, goddesses. 

how else could 1 have come upon you here, 

when first i set my foot within the land, 

i who live sparely, you whom wine delights not? 

how else could i have found this holy seat 

not hewn by mortal hands? then, goddesses, no 

according to the prophecy of apollo, 

grant that i may forthwith attain my goal, 

the close of my life's course, unless i seem 

unworthy of such grace, i who have been 

slave to the heaviest ills that men endure. 

hear me, kind daughters of primeval darkness! 

hear me, o city held in highest honor: 

athens, the city of the mighty pallas! 

have pity on this poor phantom, for in truth 

i am no more the oedipus of old. 120 

antigone: 

hush, father, hush. some old men, white with years, 
have come to seek you in your sanctuary. 

oedipus: 

i will say nothing. hide me among the trees 

till i discover what those men will say, 

for we are safe only when we have knowledge. 

exeunt. enter the chorus 



90 



chorus: 



oedipus at colonus 

search for him! search! beware! 
where is he? where has he fled? 

where is he hidden, where? 
this man without shame, without dread. 
surely he must be a stranger— not one of our race. 

wandering here from afar has the old man come. 
who else would enter the sacred, untrodden place? 
all-powerful maidens, whose name we tremble to say! 
we pass your shrine turning our eyes away, 
breathing our words of devotion with lips that are dumb. 
but now we have learned that an impious man is here, 
whose heart is untouched with awe in this holy spot. 
closely i search, for i know he is hidden near, 
yet i find him not. 



130 



oedipus: 

then search for him no longer. i am he, 
a man whose ears must take the place of eyes. 
chorus: dreadful he is to hear! dreadful to see! 
oedipus: the gods, believe me, i do not despise. 
chorus: heaven preserve us! who can this old man be? 
oedipus: not one whose fortune you should greatly prize. 
another leads me, creeping helplessly, 
and all my strength on a frail reed relies. 



140 



chorus: 



blind? blind from your birth? 
a stranger stricken in years, 

a wanderer over the earth! 150 

how bitter your life appears! 
how heavy the burden of fate that has bowed your head! 

i would save you from adding this curse to the ills you bear. 
hear me! give heed! rashly, profanely you tread 
the inviolate grove where water and honey flow 
in libations together. too far, too far you go! 
can you hear us, old man? do our voices reach you there? 

come back to us here, where speech is allowed to all. 
then you may say what you will; but speak not a word 
until you have left that ground where no foot may fall, 
no voice may be heard. 



oedipus: 



what shall we do, antigone? what is best? 



antigone: follow their custom, father. it is clear 

we should submit and do what they request. 

91 



sophocles 



di iwi'i s: i'lun put your hand in mine, an.: yes, father. i [ere. 
el i>iri -: it i should trust you, set my mind at rest; 
let me forsake my refuge without tear. 



( hori s: 

no one will force you to leave against your will. 
oi dip! s: shall 1 come closer? ch.: yes. (.'loser to me. 
oeoipus: is tli.it enough? ch.: daughter, you see 

\\ hat the old man needs to do. lead him nearer still. 

an rigone: let me guide you, father. your steps are dark. 

• • • 

c hori s; stranger, we pity your wretched state. 
you must learn to obey a foreign law: 
to hate what the city has come to hate, 
to revere what we hold in awe. 



170 



oedipus: so then, to some undedicated spot 

lead me, my child, for there i shall be free 

to speak to them and listen. let us not 
wage war in vain against necessity. 



180 



chorus: 



do not leave the bounds of the ledge beneath your feet. 



oedipus: nearer than this? ch.: no. take care. 
oedipus: shall i sit down? ch.: beside you there, 

is the level edge of the rock. let that be your seat. 
antigone: come, father, come! lean on my arm. 
walk where i walk— here— follow me. 
mv love will protect your age from harm. 
oedipus: how can such pain, such suffering be? 

chorus: rest, rest. long was the road you came, 

in misery, holding another's hand. 
but tell us now of your race, your name, 
and the name of your native land. 



100 



oedipus: 

i have no native land! but do not seek— 
chorus: seek what, old man? what is it that you have forbidden? 
oedipus: do not seek to know who i am. let my birth be hidden. 
chorus: what do you mean? oe.: it was dreadful, dreadful! 

ch.: speak! 
oedipus: how can i speak? what evil, child, is in store? 
chorus: tell us! who are you? who was your father? who? 

oedipus: daughter! what more must i now endure, what more? 
antigone: they drive you to the brink, and they must hear. 
oedipus: yes, i must tell them. i must make it clear. 

92 



oedipus at colonus 



chorus: 
oedipus: 



chorus: 

oedipus: 



answer us! speak! you are talking too long, you two! 
you have heard of laius (ch. cries out), of oedipus— 

ch.: oedipus! you! 
do not {ear—(cla?nor continues) i am lost! antigone! 
what will they do? 
go! go! out with you! out of our country! go! 
you gave me your word! will you prove to your word untrue? 



chorus: 



we do you no wrong. we give back again 

evil for evil, trick for trick. 
you were false to us. your reward is pain. 

up, up! be quick! 
you pollute the city in which you stay! 

off with you! go your way! 



antigone: 



chorus: 



oedipus: 



you are compassionate. and you. and you. 
you have heard of my father, heard the tale that is told 

of the deeds he never meant to do; 
and you cannot pity him, though he is blind and old. 

have pity, then, on me! 
on me, here pleading with you face to face. 

my eyes are as clear as yours are; i might be 
a child of your own race. 
for my father, only for him i plead. 

be mindful of him in his need. 
you are like gods to us. we stand before you 

in supplication and in fear. 

by your wife, your child, by the god whom you revere, 
by your most prized possession i implore you: 

grant us your mercy, let us hear 
words that we scarcely hope to have you say. 

what mortal is there who can disobey 
a god who leads the way? 

truly, my child, we pity both of you 
for both have suffered; but because we fear 
the judgment of the gods, we can say nothing 
beyond what we have said to you already. 



what is fame worth or golden reputation, 
when no good comes of it? men say that athens, 
above all cities, reverences the gods, 
above all cities, shelters the afflicted, 

93 



sophocles 

offers tlu- stranger refuge and defends him. 
ami have i found these qualities in athens? 240 

\uu made me quit my rocks seat, and now 
\ mi dine me from the land, fearing my name, 
my name alone. what else have you to fear? 
not my <>un person, not what 1 have done. 
you shrink from me because of my father and mother, 
but i know this: if i could tell their story, 
then you would see i did not act myself 
so much as 1 endured the acts of others. 
was 1 by nature evil? was 1 a sinner, 

i who repaid an injury done to me? 250 

if i had acted knowingly, even then 
you could not think me wrong; but i knew nothing. 
all that i did 1 did in ignorance. 
they at whose hands i suffered meant to kill me. 
since you have drawn me from my sanctuary, 
sirs, by the gods, i beg you to protect me. 
how can you honor them when you refuse 
to pay them due respect? the gods look down 
alike upon the pious and the impious. 

remember that not one irreverent man 260 

ever escaped them. may they help you now! 
lest you should darken the bright fame of athens 
bv doing unholy deeds. you have received me, 
a suppliant who trusted in your pledge. 
deliver me from my peril; guard me well. 
do not despise me when you see my face 
disfigured as it is; for i am holy, 
under the gods' protection, and i have come 
to bring a blessing to the people here. 

when i have spoken to your lord the king, 270 

you will have heard all and will understand. 
until he comes, take care you do not harm me. 
chorus: 

sir, these are matters of a fearful import. 
we feel the weight of what you urge upon us, 
and are content to let the king pass judgment. 

oedipus: 

where is the ruler of this country, strangers? 
chorus: 

in the city where his father once was king. 

the man who summoned us has gone to bring him. 

oedipus: 

will he have consideration for a blind man? 

will he care enough, do you think, to come himself? 280 

94 



oedipus at colonus 
chorus: 

yes, he will come, when he has heard your name. 

oedipus: 

who is there that could give him such a message? 
chorus: 

the road is long, and every traveler 

helps to spread rumors. when they reach the king, 

you can be certain that he will not linger, 

for every land has learned your name, old man. 

even if he is resting or asleep, 

when once he hears of you he will come quickly. 

oedipus: 

and may his coming here bring happiness 

no less to his own city than to me! 290 

for so a good man benefits himself. 

antigone: 

father! can it be true? do i dare say it? 

oedipus: 

what is the matter, child? an.: i see a woman 

coming in our direction. she is riding 

a colt of etna; a thessalian hat 

keeps the sun off her face. i think i know her. 

no, i am wrong. yes! it is she, it is! 

i see her radiant look as she comes closer. 

ismene! our ismene! she is here! 

oedipus: 

do you mean it? an.: yes, your daughter and my sister. 
a minute longer and her voice will tell you. 



enter ismene 

ismene: 

father! sister! the sweetest of all names. 

how hard it was, how hard it was to find you! 

and now i can scarcely see you through my tears. 
oedipus: 

child, are you here? is.: you have suffered, father, suffered! 

oedipus: 

ismene, have you come? is.: a weary journey. 
oedipus: 

touch me, my daughter, is.: each of you take my hand. 
oedipus: 

children, children! is.: how miserable a life! 
oedipus: 

her life and mine? is.: i am the third in sorrow. 

95 



sophocles 
oeoipi si 

why have you come here? is.: to look after you. 310 

01 kim »; 

anxious to see me? iv: yes, and to bring you news. 
i came with the only servant 1 could trust. 

01 huh v 

\i.u that we need their help, where are vour brothers? 
is ml m : 

they are both— where they are. false! treacherous! 
i>i nil'i s: 

their lives are copies of the life in egvpt! 

where men at home sit weaving, while the women 

( m> iiit to earn the family's daily bread. 

as for you, children, those whose task it was 

to help me bear my burden stav indoors, 

tending the house like girls, while in their place 320 

you share these miseries. antigone, 

ever since you outgrew the childish years 

that needed care, and came to womanhood, 

you led me, old and weary, on my journeys. 

time after time you roamed the savage forest, 

hungry and barefoot. time after time you suffered 

from drenching rain and the fierce heat of the sun, 

giving no thought to home with all its comforts 

so that your father might not be neglected. 

ismene, you stole out of thebes unnoticed, 330 

bringing the oracles that the gods had uttered 

concerning me. and you assumed the office 

of faithful sentinel on my behalf, 

when i was being driven from the land. 

what brought vou here? w 'hat is your news this time? 

you are not empty-handed. i am certain 

you have a message that 1 dread to hear. 
ismene: 

father, what i endured in seeking you 

i will not speak of. i have no wish to suffer 

a second time in making known my hardships. 340 

but the evil that has come upon your sons, 

your ill-starred sons— this is the news i bring. 

at first, when they considered in cold blood 

the ancestral curse that had not loosed its hold 

on your unhappy house, they were content 

to give the throne to creon, that the city 

might not become unclean. but now, some god 

and their own evil minds have maddened them, 

rousing them to a sinful rivalry 

for the title and authority of king. 350 

96 



oedipus at colonus 

polyneices has been driven from his throne, 

and from the country, by his younger brother. 

and it is rumored that he now has fled 

for refuge to the vale of argos. there 

he makes a new alliance by his marriage 

and raises up an army of new friends. 

he means to have proud argos conquer thebes 

or lift up thebes triumphant to the stars. 

this is not idle fancy; they have done 

these fearful deeds. but where the gods will bring 360 

your sorrows to an end i cannot tell. 

oedipus: 

my sorrows! can you hope the gods will ever 
appoint a time for my deliverance? 

ismene: 

yes. the new oracle has given me hope. 

oedipus: 

what oracle, child? what has been prophesied? 
ismene: 

that before long our countrymen will seek you, 
living or dead, to safeguard their own welfare. 

oedipus: 

and who could benefit from such as i am? 
ismene: 

you have become the source of theban strength. 
oedipus: 

when i am helpless, do i become a man? 370 

ismene: 

the gods who struck you down now lift you up. 
oedipus: 

to ruin youth and honor age is petty. 
ismene: 

and yet because this oracle has been spoken 

creon will not be long in coming here. 
oedipus: 

why will he come, ismene? can you tell me? 

ismene: 

to get you within their grasp and then to keep you 

close to their land, where you may not set foot. 
oedipus: 

how can i be of help outside their borders? 
ismene: 

if they neglect your tomb, they will be cursed. 

oedipus: 

that truth we know without a god to tell us. 380 

97 



sophocles 

ls\u m 

aiul m> they want you near them, in a place 
\\ here you will not be free from their control. 
cm mi'i b: 

at least the) will bury me in theban earth. 

b\ll m 

they cannot. you have shed your father's blood. 
oedun s: 

i hen they shall never have ine in their power! 

is.\u m 

someday this will he hard for thebes to bear. 

oed1pi s 

when will that happen? what will cause it, child? 

bmen1 

\ our anger, when they stand beside your tomb. 
oedipi s: 

where did you hear what you are telling me? 

is mem : 

from the ambassadors to the shrine of delphi. 390 

oedipus: 

that was apollo's prophecy? you are certain? 
ismene: 

so the men said when they returned to thebes. 

oedipus: 

have either of your brothers heard of this? 
ismene: 

yes, both of them; they understand it well. 

oedipus: 

so then, those scoundrels, knowing what they did, 
cared more for kingship than for my return! 
ismene: 

your words are terrible, but they are true. 

oedipus: 

may the gods grant the blaze be not extinguished! 
the blaze they kindled when they took up arms 
in the war that was their portion. may the outcome 400 

rest in mv hands alone! were i the judge, 
he who is king now should be king no longer; 
he who is exiled should remain in exile. 
when i, their father, was proclaimed an outlaw, 
when i was driven shamefully from my home 
and banished from my country, they did nothing- 
nothing to hinder it, nothing to help me. 
the city acted rightlv, you will say, 
in granting me what i mvself desired. 
no. i did not desire it. when my soul, 410 

98 



oedipus at colonus 

on that first day, was shaken by a tempest, 
when death by stoning was my dearest wish, 
i could find none to give me what i longed for. 
and later when my anguish was allayed, 
and i began to feel that my misdeeds 
had been too heavily punished by my passion, 
then was it that the city, long delaying, 
drove me away by force. and my two sons, 
who could have helped their father, would not help him, 
would not so much as speak a single word, 420 

but let me wander forth, from that time forward 
a homeless outcast brought to beggary. 
these two, these daughters, have done everything 
that women could do. they have given me 
food, a safe shelter, filial loyalty: 

while their two brothers, turning against their father, 
snatched at the throne and scepter of a king. 
never shall they win oedipus for an ally! 
never shall any benefit come to them 

from ruling over thebes! that i am sure of 430 

now that i hear ismene's oracles, 
and now that i consider those of old, 
those that apollo has fulfilled at last. 
therefore, let them send creon after me, 
creon or any theban who has power. 
because if you are willing to assist me— 
you, strangers, with your great protectresses, 
the dreadful goddesses who guard your land— 
you will secure deliverance for yourselves 
and bring disaster on my enemies. 440 

chorus: 

you and your daughters waken our compassion. 
your misery and your saying you can save us 
prompt me to counsel you for your own good. 

oedipus: 

sir, you are kind. i will accept your guidance. 
chorus: 

then make atonement to those deities 

whose ground you trespassed on when you first came here. 

oedipus: 

what are the ceremonies? tell me, stranger. 
chorus: 

first cleanse your hands, then bring for the libation 

the water of an ever-flowing spring. 
oedipus: 

and when i have clear water, then what follows? 450 

99 



sophocles 

c iioia i: 

you will find bowls oi cunning workmanship. 
( over the rims and the handles on each side. 

01 mp! 8 

what shall i use- young branches? woolen fabrics? 
c host s: 

you will be given lamb's wool, newly shorn. 

01 dli'i s: 

ami after that, how is the rire completed? 
( hoki s: 

face toward the dawn and pour out your libations. 

oedipus: 

using the bowls that you have spoken of? 

( horus: 

yes, but the third one must be wholly emptied. 

oedipus: 

what offering do i pour from this last bowl? 
chorus: 

water and honey, but with no wine added. 460 

oedipus: 

the shadowed earth will swallow it. what next? 
chorus: 

using both hands, lay on the ground thrice nine 
branches of olive, while you pronounce your prayer. 

oedipus: 

say what it is, for it concerns me greatly. 
chorus: 

you, or whoever acts in your behalf, 

should prav those powers whose name is the benignant 

to give a suppliant their benign protection. 

speak softly, do not raise your voice. then go 

without a backward glance. if you do this, 

i will take courage and come to your defence; 470 

otherwise, oedipus, i fear for you. 

oedipus: 

children, you heard the advice of those who live here? 

antigone: 

yes, we have heard. tell us what we must do. 

oedipus: 

i cannot go. i bear a double burden, 

blindness and lack of strength. one of you two 

co and discharge those duties. i am sure 

one loyal, faithful soul before the shrine 

makes ample satisfaction for ten thousand. 

go quicklv, then; but do not leave me helpless. 

how can i move without a hand to guide me? 480 

100 



oedipus at colonus 
ismene: 

father, i will perform these ceremonies, 
when someone tells me where to find the place. 
chorus: 

there, on the far side of the grove, my child. 
if you need anything, a guard will help you. 

ismene: 

then i will go. antigone, stay here 

to help our father. nothing we do for him, 

however hard, can ever be called hardship. 

exit ismene 

chorus: 

it is dreadful, sir, to waken long-slumbering sorrow, 

yet high are our hopes that the truth will be told at last. 
oe.: what row? ch.: of your anguish beyond all relief, all cure, 490 

the grief that has held you fast. 
oe.: as a stranger, a guest i implore you not to uncover 

the shame i have had to endure. 
ch.: wide-spread is the story and grows no less in the telling, 

let us hear it rightly told; we are eager to learn. 
oe.: have mercy! ch.: be patient, sir. oe.: no! ch.: we did all 
that you asked for. 
do this in your turn. 

oe.: of the deeds that have brought me to misery none was intended. 

be zeus my witness! not one of them all, not one! 
ch.: what were they? oe.: the thebans gave me, unknowing, 

a bride, 500 

a curse that i could not shun. 
ch.: can the tale as we heard it be true: that your marriage was shameful, 

that your mother lay by your side? 
oe.: you stab me! your words are cruel as death to me, stranger. 

and these daughters, these two— how fearful a thing to tell!— 
ch.: your daughters! oe.: my scourges! ch.: no! never! 
oe.: the mother who bore them 
bore me as well. 

ch.: their mother and yours you wed! 

then these are your daughters and— oe.: sisters! their father's 
sisters! 
ch.: horrible! oe.: countless horrors recoil on my head. 510 

ch.: you have suffered— oe.: as much as a man can bear. 

ch.: what you did— oe.: i did nothing, ch.: nothing! oe.: no. i 
was given 
a gift by the thebans— would i had never deserved it— 
a gift of grief beyond compare. 

101 



sophocles 

i ii.: 1 here is more than we long to know. 

is it true) > hi. i re stained with blood? »>i .: why, why do you ask me? 
hi.: with the blood of \ our father? oe.: you strike me blow after 

wow! 
i h.: \ ou lolled him! *>i .: \ es, lolled him! and yet i am sure— 

in.: sure of what? m.otim innocence, ch.: no! ok.: of what 
crime am i guilty? 
i saved mv own life, i killed the men who attacked me. 520 

1 have fallen this low, but my hands are pure. 

chorus: 

our king is coming— theseus, the son of aegeus. 
your message, sir, has summoned him to help you. 

enter theseus 

theseus: 

i know you, son of laius; for long ago 
i heard of the bloody act that blinded you, 
and i have learned still more from what was told me 
as i was coming here. your clothes, your face, 
scarred and disfigured, show me who you are. 
such misery as yours moves my compassion. 
what suit to athens or to me has brought you 530 

into our presence, with the unhappy girl 
who stands beside you there? make known your purpose. 
you could not tell me of a fate so fearful 
that i would stand aloof— i who remember 
that in my childhood i too was an exile, 
and that no man has risked his life so often 
as i in my encounters in far lands. 
i could not turn awav from anyone 
like you, a stranger, or refuse to help him. 
i know well, being mortal, that mv claim 540 

upon the future is no more than yours. 
oedipus: 

theseus, the kindness of your words is kingly, 
so that i need say little. you spoke the truth 
about mv name, mv parentage, and my country. 
nothing remains for me except to say 
what my desire is, and my tale is told. 

theseus: 

i am eager to learn what you would have me do. 
oedipus: 

i have come here to offer you a gift: 

my old, worn, ugly body. yet it brings you 

far greater benefit than beauty could. 550 

102 



oedipus at colonus 
theseus: 

what benefit can you say your body brings? 
oedipus: 

you shall learn later, but not yet, i think. 
theseus: 

when will it finally be made known to us? 
oedipus: 

when i am dead and you have buried me. 
theseus: 

you set your heart upon the close of life, 

forgetting or ignoring the years between. 
oedipus: 

yes, but the close will gather in life's harvest. 

theseus: 

why then, the favor that you ask is small. 

oedipus: 

and yet my burial is no slight issue. 
theseus: 

because it lies between your sons and me? 560 

oedipus: 

theseus, they hope to take me back to thebes. 
theseus: 

then it is wrong for you to stay in exile. 
oedipus: 

no, no! when i was willing, they refused. 
theseus: 

as matters stand with you, anger is foolish. 
oedipus: 

bear with me now. reprove me when you have heard me. 
theseus: 

speak. i must not pass judgment without knowledge. 
oedipus: 

i have suffered, theseus, wrong after bitter wrong. 
theseus: 

you mean the ancient curse upon your race? 
oedipus: 

no. all the land has echoed with that story. 
theseus: 

what is it then? some more than mortal grief? 570 

oedipus: 

my life has come to this: i have been driven 

from thebes by my two sons, and am condemned 

to life-long exile as a parricide. 
theseus: 

then how can they bring you back from banishment? 
oedipus: 

the oracle of the gods will force them to. 

103 



sophocles 

mi n l b: 

\\ hat lias been prophesied to muse their fear? 
oj dipi b; 

1 h.ir here ill athens they will be struck down. 

i hi s| t v 

what bitterness could ever come between us? 
ui dipi b: 

dear son of aegeus, onlv the gods themselves 

are tree from age or death. all else is ruined 580 

b) overmastering time. the strength of earth, 
i he strength <>t the body, both alike decay. 

faith dies, and lack of faith comes into being. 
and friendship between men and between cities 
is but a breath that blows unsteadily; 
for all discover that love turns to hatred, 
and that from hatred love springs up anew. 
the skv is cloudless over thebes and athens, 
yet time in its endless course will bring to birth 
unnumbered nights and days, and one of these 590 

will mark the moment when, for some slight word, 
their swords will cut this concord into shreds; 
and when my body in its sleep of death, 
cold in the grave, will drink up their warm blood, 
if zeus be zeus and phoebus a true prophet. 
but these are mysteries that i must not speak of. 
let what i sav end with my first request. 
make good your promise to me. then you will find 
profit in letting me live here in your land, 

unless the gods intend to play me false. 600 

chorus: 

sir, from the first, this man has shown himself 
willing and able to do good to us. 

theseus: 

then surely we must not reject the friendship 

of such a man as this. he is our ally, 

to whom we owe our hospitality 

by mutual right. moreover, he has come 

as a suppliant to our goddesses, and brings 

no small return to athens and to me. 

i reverence these claims, and i accept 

the favor which he offers. i will make him 610 

a citizen of our country. if he wishes 

to stay with you, 1 charge you to protect him. 

or it may please you better, oedipus, 

to come with me to athens. you need only 

make your decision, and i am satisfied. 

104 



oedipus at colonus 
oedipus: 

zeus, look with favor on such men as this! 

theseus: 

what is your pleasure, sir? to go with me? 

oedipus: 

if it were lawful, yes. but this is the place— 

theseus: 

what must you do here? i will not oppose you. 

oedipus: 

here i shall vanquish those who have cast me out. 620 

theseus: 

your presence here brings promise of great good. 

oedipus: 

yes, good, if you are faithful to your pledge. 

theseus: 

you need not fear that i shall ever fail you. 

oedipus: 

i will exact no oath. you are not false. 

theseus: 

an oath could be no better than my word. 

oedipus: 

but how, how will you help? th.: what frightens you? 

oedipus: 

they will come here— th.: these friends will take care of that. 
oedipus: 

but if you leave me— th.: i know what i must do. 
oedipus: 

there is good cause for fear— th.: i am not fearful. 
oedipus: 

you do not know the threats— th.: i know this much: 630 

no one shall take you away against my will. 

how often loud and empty threats break out 

in sudden anger! but as soon as reason 

asserts its mastery, they come to nothing. 

as for the thebans, though they have plucked up courage 

to menace you with talk of your abduction, 

yet they will find the seas that stretch between us 

too wide and stormy for their navigation. 

take heart, sir. for aside from my resolve 

to shelter you, apollo has been your guide. 640 

and yet, i think, though i am not here myself, 

my name will be sufficient to protect you. 

exit theseus 



105 



sophocles 

mom i: 

noble the breed of horses here 
in w hue ( clonus, the land of our birth, 
1 he l«»\clicst land in all the earth. 
\ distant music, pure and clear, 
rises from green, secluded \ ales: 
the constant mil oi the nightingales 

deep in their haunts of tangled vine, 

of sacred ivy, dark as wine. 650 

thick is the god's inviolate wood, 

rich in berries and rich in fruir. 

the sun is curtained, the wind is mute. 

here i )ion\ stis makes his home, 

and reveling with him, forever roam 
the nymphs who nursed him in bahvhood. 

daily by heavenly dew is fed 
the narcissus, that the immortals wear 
in crowning clusters on their hair. 

and here the crocus lifts its head, 660 

spreading abroad its golden gleam. 
and all year long a brimming stream, 

fed by fountains that never fail. 

winds on its way through hill and dale, 
down to the broad and swelling plains, 

with its crystal current evermore 

quickening the soil's abundant store. 

to the muses' choir is the country dear; 

and aphrodite has lingered here, 
goddess who rides with the golden reins. 670 

here is a marvel unheard of elsewhere, 

here only the grey-leaved olive grows 
self-renewed, invincible, nurse of our children, 

a thing of terror to all our foes. 
wide through the land spread its hallowed branches, 

by the hands of youth and of age unmarred, 
a tree that zeus's unsleeping vision 

and pallas athene's grey eyes guard. 

praised be the might of athens, our mother: 

the splendid gift that a god confers. 680 

she is famed for her colts, for the breed of her horses; 

and dominion over the sea is hers. 
our lord poseidon established her glory 

when he fashioned the bridle that tames the steed, 
when he fashioned the oar that leaps to follow 

where the dancing feet of the sea-nymphs lead. 

106 



oedipus at colonus 
antigone: 

you have been praised above all lands, colonus! 
let what you do now be as glorious. 

oedipus: 

antigone! what is it? an.: it is creon. 

father, he is not coming here alone. 690 

oedipus: 

friends! friends! you are kind-hearted, all of you! 
bring me, i beg you, to the goal of safety! 

chorus: 

take courage. you shall be safe. though we are old, 
colonus still has all the strength of youth. 



enter creon and other thebans 
creon: 

i see that you are the elders of this country 
and that my coming here has frightened you, 
but do not shrink from me or speak in anger. 
i have not come with any violent purpose. 
i am an old man. furthermore, i know 

that in all hellas there is no mightier city 700 

than this that i have come to. old as i am, 
i have been sent to plead with him, to beg him 
to go with me, back to the land of cadmus. 
i am the envoy, not of one man alone, 
but of the whole of thebes since, as his kinsman, 
i felt more sorrow than the rest could feel 
for his great sufferings. then hear me, sir. 
unhappy oedipus, come home with us. 
all the cadmean race, as is their right, 

are summoning you, and i above them all. 710 

for unless i am the basest man in the world, 
i in particular must pity you, 
when i see you as you are: a life-long stranger, 
old, wretched, drifting, destitute, untended 
except for this one girl. i never thought 
she could have fallen to such a depth as this— 
poor child! the nurse of what you have become, 
leading a life of beggary, still young 
and still unmarried, a prize for the first comer. 
this is a harsh reproof, hateful to utter. 720 

we are involved— you, i, and all our race- 
in open shame that cannot be concealed. 
therefore, by your ancestral gods i beg you 
to bring it to an end. oedipus, hear me! 

107 



sophocles 

("nine back to your fathers' house, your fathers 1 city. 
pan from tins land in friendship; she deserves it. 
hut your own country, your nurse of long ago, 
mas the first claim upon your piety. 

oj dipt s. 

creon, is there nothing you shrink from doing? 

your cunning can take am plea and turn 730 

its justice into trickery! do you hope 

to lure me a second tunc into a trap 
where 1 would touch the depth oi misery" 
once, long ago, w hen 1 was sick with the anguish 
that 1 myself had brought upon my head, 
when my one passionate wish was to he exiled, 
you could not bring yourself to show me kindness. 
hut later, when the storm had spent itself, 
when it seemed sweet to me to live at home, 
that was the moment that you chose to drive me 740 

out of my house, out of my country. then 
you were untouched by any claim of kinship. 
hut when you see how warmly i am welcomed 
bv athens and her people, you undertake 
to draw me away again, with gentle words 
hiding vour cruel purpose. who takes pleasure 
in kindness done to him against his will? 
for if a man denied you what vou longed for, 
refused his help until vou had found already 
full satisfaction for vour needs, his offer 750 

would be worth nothing. vour deceitful offer 
is worth no more. and to make plain your falsehood, 
i will tell all men here what you intend: 
you ha\e not come to take me home again 
but only to bring me to the theban border. 
there vou would keep me to prevent our city 
from being harmed by athens. but that lot 
is not for you. another is: my curse 
to haunt the country. and this is my sons' portion 
of their inheritance: a place to die in. 760 

is not my knowledge of theban destiny 
truer than yours? its sources are more unerring: 
apollo and his father, zeus himself. 
you come to me with falsehood upon your lips 
and with a hard, keen edge upon vour tongue; 
and vet your words do vou more harm than good. 
but well i know that i can never convince you. 
leave us alone! go! even as we are, 
patience would make our life here not unhappy. 

108 



oedipus at colon us 
creon: 

do you think that such an outcome of our meeting 770 

will injure me more than it injures you? 

oedipus: 

nothing could be so sweet as to have you fail 
with everyone here, as you have failed with me. 
creon: 

must your life prove that long years bring no wisdom? 
will not your wretchedness disgrace old age? 

oedipus: 

your tongue is clever, but i know of no one 
who can be always fluent and yet honest. 

creon: 

yes, fluency is often out of place. 

oedipus: 

you mean your words were brief and to the point! 

creon: 

not for a man with as little sense as you. 780 

oedipus: 

creon, i speak for all of us. be off! 
recall your sentinels. w'atch me no longer. 
this is the spot where i was meant to stay. 

creon: 

men of colonus, be witness to his behavior. 
(to oedipus ) you i have done with. as for the way you speak 
to your own kindred, if i get hold of you— 
oedipus: 

no one gets hold of me. here are my friends and allies. 

creon: 

you will soon suffer. there are other ways. 
oedipus: 

threats! boasts! how do you hope to make them good? 

creon: 

how? through your daughters: one has been seized already 790 
and sent away; the other will soon be taken. 

oedipus: 

no! no! cr.: what! crying? you will cry louder soon. 
oedipus: 

friends! friends! help! help! do not forsake me friends! 

he is guilty of sacrilege! drive him from the land! 
chorus: 

go, creon, go! what you have done already 

and what you are doing now is wickedness. 

creon (to guards): 

you. it is time now. seize her. carry her off, 
unless she is willing to go of her own accord. 

109 



sophocles 

( as i igoni turning to fly 1 1 

i ost! lost! i hey arc everyv here! no one can save me. no one! 
sot even .1 god! i h.: what are you doing, creon? 800 

1 will nor touch him, hut the woman is mine. 
0sdip1 b 

i hliis' princes! ch.: creon, you have no right. 

creon 

i have, ch.: how so? cr.: 1 take what belongs to me. 

01 1'liu s: 

athens! athens! 
chorus: stop! let her go! we shall see who is stronger! 
creon: keep away! ch.: not from you while she still is your prisoner. 

creon: athens and thebes are at war if you touch me. 
oedipus: i foretold this would happen! ch.: release her this moment! 
free her, i tell you! cr.: be quiet! have you power to 
command me? 
chorus: set her at liberty! cr.: (to guards) off with you. follow 

vour orders. 810 

chorus: athenians! countrymen! save us! 
our city, our land is dishonored! 
come to our rescue! 

antigone: 

friends! friends! they have taken me prisoner! help me! help! 

oedipus: 

where are you, antigone? an.: here! they are dragging 
me off! 

oedipus: 

give me your hand! an.: i cannot. i am helpless. 
creon (to guards): 

take her away. be off. oe.: oh! how i suffer! 

exeunt guards and antigone 

creon: 

so, in your wanderings you will never again 
have those two staffs to lean on. you had hoped 
to triumph over your country and your friends, 820 

whose orders i obey, prince though i am. 
well then, enjoy your triumph. yet in time 
you will come to see that now, as in the past, 
to turn against your friends does you no good. 
always you have been cursed by your quick temper. 
chorus: 

stop, creon, stop! cr.: keep your hands off, i tell you! 

110 



oedipus at colonus 

chorus (seizing him) : 

not while those two girls are your prisoners. 
creon (throwing them off) : 

in that case i will carry off to thebes 

more than his daughters as security. 
chorus: 

what are you going to do? cr.: seize oedipus. 830 

chorus: 

a fearful threat! cr.: no, not a threat, a fact— 

unless, perhaps, your king will come to stop me. 
oedipus: 

what shameless words! will you lay hands on me? 
creon: 

be still! oe.: no! goddesses, dread guardians! 

grant that i may utter this one curse. 

this fiend has torn away the helpless girl 

who was my eyesight when these eyes were dark. 

therefore, thou sun-god, all-beholding helios, 

hear thou my prayer: may he and all his race 

in their old age lead such a life as mine. 840 

creon: 

be witnesses of that, men of colonus. 
oedipus: 

they see us both. they know what you have done, 

and know that my revenge is only breath. 
creon: 

i cannot contain myself! i am alone 

and slow with age, but i will take him with me. 

oedipus: 

how can i bear it? 
chorus: have you boldness enough to suppose you can do it? 
creon: yes, i have, ch.: then is athens a city no longer. 
creon: with justice to arm them the weak are triumphant. 
oedipus: do you hear what he threatens? ch.: zeus knows it 

shall never 850 

be put into practice, cr.: zeus knows, but not you. you 
know nothing. 
chorus: insolence! insolence! cr.: yes. but you have to endure it. 
chorus: citizens! citizens! princes! 

follow them! after them quickly! 
make for the border! 

enter theseus with attendants 

theseus: 

what do you want? your shouting has cut short 
my sacrifice before the sea-god's altar. 

ill 



sophocles 

what has been happening? let me know the trouble 
1 h.it has brought me here too quickly for my comfort. 

in nun s: 

\k friend! 1 know your voice. i am wronged, wronged! 86o 

mi si i s: 

1 low? who has done you wrong"- speak, oedipus. 

01 1'li-i s: 

1 hat man there, creon. 1 le has carried off 

\1\ last rem. uning children, my two daughters. 

1111 m l s: 

what! t>i ..: yes, it is true. (.'icon has taken them. 
thesi us (to attendants): 

one of \ ou there. quick! ( ro back to the altars. 

break off the sacrifice. i lave them start out— 

i \ eryone, horse and foot— at their top speed 

to where the roads fork. if the women are lost, 

1 will become this stranger's laughingstock, 

beaten by brute strength. go, i tell you! quickly! 870 

exit attendant 

as for that man, if i had let myself 

treat him as he deserves, he would have felt 

the violence of my anger. but instead, 

he shall be subject to the kind of law 

that he himself has brought here, (to creon) you shall never 

leave athens until those women stand before me. 

what you have done is a disgrace to me, 

to those of your own blood, and to your country. 

you have come to a land always upholding justice, 

sanctioning nothing without recourse to law; 880 

and yet you have slighted our authority, 

burst in upon us, seized and carried away 

whoever took your fancy, as if you thought 

that there were no men left within my city, 

or only slaves, and i was a mere nothing. 

thebes did not teach you this outrageous conduct. 

to breed rebellious sons is not her custom; 

nor would she praise you if she saw you now, 

robbing me, yes, robbing the gods themselves 

by kidnapping their wretched suppliants. 890 

if i were standing now on theban soil, 

i would not drag off anything by force, 

however just my claim to it might be, 

without your ruler's sanction. i would know 

how i, as a foreigner, should live among you. 

112 






oedipus at colonus 

you bring dishonor upon an innocent city, 

your own thebes; and although you have lived long, 

you are still stupid. i have told you once, 

and i tell you again now: bring his daughters back 

without delay, unless you wish to live 900 

among us as an alien, a forced guest. 

these are not merely words. my heart is in them. 

chorus: 

you hear that, stranger? that is our judgment of you; 
your land is noble and your deeds are base. 
creon: 

theseus, how could i ever think that athens 

lacked manliness or wisdom? i supposed 

her citizens would never be so eager 

to serve my kinsmen as to shelter them 

against my will. this country, i was certain, 

would show no hospitality to a man 910 

steeped in pollution: the slayer of his father, 

and partner of an unholy marriage-bed, 

mother with son. knowing the hill of ares 

makes wise decisions and does not allow 

such vagabonds to stay here, i felt free 

to seize this prize. yet i would not have touched him 

if he had not called down a bitter curse 

on me and on my race, an injury 

which justified, i thought, my giving back 

evil for evil. anger does not grow old; 920 

only the dead escape the sting of it. 

you can, of course, act any way you choose, 

for i am helpless, though my cause is just. 

yet i will do my best, old as i am, 

to follow the example that you set me. 

oedipus: 

what bare-faced insolence, creon! whose old age 

do you think has been dishonored, yours or mine? 

you have poured out a stream of accusations: 

murder and incest, all the disastrous things 

that my hard fate has forced me to endure. 930 

so the gods willed it, nursing their long displeasure, 

doubtless, against my house. for i myself 

cannot be charged with any deliberate crime 

for which, as retribution, i was driven 

to sin against my parents and myself. 

tell me. if through some oracle my father 

was destined to be slain by his own son, 

could i be justly blamed— i, not yet born, 

113 



sofiiocles 

not j et si) much as begotten or conceived? 

and it, being born at last t.. bear this burden, 940 

1 nice my father, noi knowing who he was, 

(jii.un.uil, and killed him without intending to, 

what sin attaches to tins ignorant act r 

as for im mother how contemptible!— 

do you feel no shame in forcing me u> speak 

as 1 now must of her— of your own sister— 

ami nt her marriage; tor your words have gone 

beyond the bounds of piety. my mother! 

yes it was she— what bitterness!— who in shame 

bore children to the child that she had borne, 950 

i hough neither she nor i knew what we did. 
one thing at least 1 know— that you are ready 
to slander us, for of my own tree w ill 
i did not marry, nor of my own free will 
do i now speak. i cannot he thought guilty. 
not in this marriage. not in my father's murder 
that you are forever throwing in my teeth. 
answ er me this one question that 1 ask you. 
if, here and now, someone came up to you 

and tried to kill you— you, the innocent creon— 960 

what would you do? inquire if he was your father, 
or strike hack instantly? loving your life, 
you would, i am sure, repay him blow for blow 
without a long search for your legal sanction. 
yet that was the catastrophe i encountered, 
led by the gods. if he could live again, 
my father himself would not deny the truth 
of what i say. but you— lacking all sense 
of fitness, babbling, making no distinction 

between what should and what should not be talked of— 970 
you, here in public, heap your insults on me. 
and this, you think, is the proper time to flatter 
the famous theseus and to proclaim how well 
the athenian state is governed. yet in giving 
such lavish praises, you forget that athens 
exxels in reverent worship of the gods; 
for you had planned to abduct me, an old man 
who had sought the gods' protection. you have seized 
my daughters and have tried to seize me also. 
hence, i invoke these goddesses, with prayers 980 

beseeching them to come to my assistance, 
to fight in my defence, that you may learn 
what manner of men they are who guard this city. 

114 



oedipus at colonu3 
chorus: 

sir, oedipus, our guest, has been accurst; 

yet he is innocent and deserves our help. 
theseus: 

we have talked enough. those who have done this violence 

hurry away, and we, their victims, stand here. 
creon: 

what orders have you for a helpless man? 
theseus: 

these. lead us after them. take me along. 

if you have kept his daughters in this country, 990 

show me where i can find them. but if your men 

are carrying off their prize, we need not trouble. 

others will catch them. they will never thank 

their gods for their escape from athens. come! 

lead on! the captor is made captive; fortune 

has snared the hunter; no ill-gotten gains 

can be kept long. but do not expect your helper; 

for daring and insolent though you are, i know 

you did not undertake this singlehanded. 

no, you had some accomplice whom you trusted 1000 

when you came here. he must be hunted down. 

athens must be the master and not he. 

can you grasp any part of what i have said? 

or do you think you can ignore my words, 

as you ignored those warnings that you heard 

when you first put your scheming into practice? 
creon: 

whatever you say here i shall not object to. 

when i am home, i shall know how to act. 
theseus: 

threaten me if you want, but lead the way. 

now, oedipus, you can stay here in peace 1010 

with my assurance that, unless i die, 

i will restore your children to your hands. 

oedipus: 

you have acted nobly, theseus. may the gods 
reward you for the kindness you have shown me. 

exeunt theseus, creon, and attendants 
chorus: 

would we were there in the clamor of battle! 
there where the enemy, wheeling to meet us, 

takes up his stand; 
perhaps at the shore beloved by apollo, 
perhaps where the two great goddesses hallow 

the torch-lit sand, 1020 

115 



sophocles 

whose priest, performing their awful service, 
1 < il ks their votaries 1 lips in silence. 
\\ .11 u aking 1 heseus vi ill come on the captives, 
\\ ill free the two sisters while shunts of his warriors 
ring through the land. 

perhaps to the w est of the snow s of .mount oca, 
racing their chariots, urging their horses, 

1 [eadlong they flee. 
creon will fail! those who follow king theseus 
are mighty in battle, and we of colonus, 1030 

mighty are we! 
the hits and bridles flash in the sunlight, 
as all of them ride in pursuit at full gallop: 
the horsemen who worship their goddess, athene, 
and rhea's loved son, earth-circling poseidon, 

lord of the sea. 

have thev found them vet? arc they fighting? 

my soul is prophetic! i know 
the maidens will soon stand before us, 

freed from their hard-hearted kinsman. 1040 

zeus will be with us; some wonder 

to-dav he will work on the foe! 
o, to soar like a dove to the heavens, 
with the speed and strength of a whirlwind, 

to view the battle below! 

zeus, all-ruling, all-seeing 

lord of olympus, o hear! 
hear, dread athene, his daughter! 
make strong the fighters who guard us, 
and crown with success their endeavors! 1050 

phoebus, thou hunter, draw near! 
succor this land and this people, 
thou, and thv sister who follows 

the dappled, fleet-footed deer. 

and now, my friend, you will not need to accuse 

your watchman of false prophecy. i see 

your daughters coming, and an escort with them. 

oedipus: 

where? where? what are you saying? 
116 



oedipus at colonus 

enter antigone, ismene, theseus, and his attendants 

antigone: 

father! father! 

if only some god would let you see this man, 

this noble man who has brought us back to you! 1060 

oedipus: 

daughter! are you both there? an.: yes. these strong hands 

have rescued us— theseus and his kind friends. 
oedipus: 

antigone, here! here to your father's arms! 

i had given up hope of holding you again. 

antigone: 

yes, father, yes. your wish and mine are one. 
oedipus: 

where are you, then, where are you? an.: we are coming. 
oedipus {embracing them): 

my dear, dear children! an.: a father loves his own. 
oedipus: 

staffs that support my age! an.: who suffer with you. 
oedipus: 

my dearest daughters! life would be not all sorrow, 

if i should die with you here in my arms. 1070 

press closely to me; cling to your father's side. 

rest there, for you were forced away, forlorn 

and desolate. tell me what happened, briefly. 

a young girl should not talk at any length. 

antigone: 

i will say little. here is the man who saved us, 
and he should be the one to tell the story. 
oedipus: 

sir, do not wonder that i give my daughters 

a welcome so prolonged, so deeply felt. 

they were restored when i had lost all hope 

of seeing them again. you, you alone 1080 

made this joy possible. you, you alone 

have rescued them. may all the gods reward you, 

you and your country, even as i would do; 

for only here in athens have i found 

truth, piety, and justice. i can give 

only these words by way of recompense: 

all that i have i have from you alone. 

stretch forth your hand, o king, that i may touch it, 

and kiss your cheek, if such an act is lawful. 

no! no! what have i said? how could i hope 1090 

to have you touch me— me, a wretched outcast, 

117 



bophocle8 

steeped in corruption? never! never! i could not! 
\ in- vt ho has not borne this burden w itli me 
can share ir now. but let me thank you, theseus, 
l • m \\ lun- 1 stand; and let me find you still 
kindly and just as 1 have always found you. 

till si l v 

the joyful greeting that you gave your children 

does not surprise me, for they shout j come first 

in your regard. i value fame that follows 

i k ids and not words, as i have proved to you, i 

because 1 have in no way fallen short 

ot w hat i promised you. i lere are vour daughters, 

alive, untouched, in spite of crcon's threats. 

as to the fight, why should i boast of it, 

when these two girls will tell you how it was won? 

but, oedipus, advise me on a matter 

which i have just been told of, as i came here. 

it seems a trifling thing, vet it is strange; 

and men, being mortal, should treat nothing lightly. 

oedipus: 

i have not heard what happened. let me know. i 

thesfus: 

a man has rushed up to poseidon's altar, 

where i was sacrificing when i first 

came hurrving here to help vou. there he sits, 

a suppliant of the god. he seems to be 

your kinsman, oedipus, though not a theban. 
oedipus: 

where does he come from? what does he want of me? 

theseus: 

he onlv asks a few brief words with you. 
you have no need, he says, to feel concerned. 

oedipus: 

then why does he need the safety of the altar? 

theseus: 

thev say he wants onlv to talk with you, i 

and then go back unharmed the way he came. 

oedipus: 

w'ho can he be who has sought the god's protection? 

theseus: 

surelv you know of someone who might seek 

this favor of you, some kinsman of yours from argos. 

oedipus: 

no more, no more, my friend! th.: what is it troubles you? 
oedipus: 

do not ask that of me! th.: ask what? come, tell me. 

118 



oedipus at colonus 
oedipus: 

i know the suppliant now from what you have said. 

theseus: 

who is he? how could i object to him? 

oedipus: 

he is my hated son. no one on earth 

could speak to me whom i would loathe so much. 1130 

theseus: 

he cannot force you to act against your will. 
can you be hurt by merely listening to him? 

oedipus: 

i hate the very sound of my son's voice. 
do not compel me to yield to you in this. 

theseus: 

does not his being a suppliant compel you? 
consider, sir. you must respect the god. 

antigone: 

father, i am young, i know, to give advice, 

but listen to me. let the king satisfy 

his conscience and do honor to the god, 

and let my brother and ismene's come. 1 140 

you need not fear that anything he might say 

to injure you could shake your resolution. 

to hear him speak— what harm could come of that? 

for wickedness is betrayed by what is spoken. 

he is your son. whatever wrong he did you, 

however impious or infamous, 

you cannot, cannot do him wrong yourself! 

let him come, father! others besides you 

have evil children and are quick to anger; 

but they can be persuaded, and their friends 1 150 

cast a charm over them that melts their mood. 

think of the past. think of your father and mother, 

and what you have endured because of them. 

you know the evil consequence that follows 

from evil anger. how could you forget, 

blind as you are? do not refuse us, father! 

those who ask justice should not have to beg. 

men should repay the benefits they receive. 

oedipus: 

the benefit you ask of me is bitter, 

antigone. but be it as you wish. 1 160 

yet if that man must come, take care, my friend, 

to keep this life of mine out of his clutches. 



119 



sophocles 

mi n 1 1 

1 need not listen twice to such a plea. 

1 would not boast, and vet you may be certain 

that \ <>u are sate u hile am god saves me. 

exit theseus 
c hojn s 

isfone but a fool would scorn life that was brief. 
none but a fool would cleave to life too long; 

1 or w hen an old man draws his lingering breath 
beyond ins fitting season, pain and grief, 

1 he harsh years' harvesting, upon him throng, 1170 

and jov is but a phantom of the past. 

then soon or late the doom of hades, death, 
comes with no dance, no lyre, no marriage song, 
and all alike delivers at the last. 

incomparably best is not to be. 
and next to this, once a man sees the day, 

is with all speed to hasten whence he came; 
after youth's trifling joy, he is not free, 
he must endure his lot as best he may: 

envy, sedition, murder, hate, and strife, 1180 

until at length old age, unfriended, lame, 
reviled, and lonely claims him for its prey: 
the wretched ending of a wretched life. 

even such is oedipus, as old as we. 
and as some cape is lashed on every side 

by wind-swept surges of the winter sea, 
so on his head dashes the deepening tide 

of life-long sorrow, so the great winds blow 
from earliest dawn to sunset, from the bright 
and blazing midday to the dead of night: 1190 

unceasing bitterness, unceasing woe. 

antigone: 

look! it is he, i think, the suppliant. 
father, he is alone and comes in tears. 
oedipls: 

who is he. daughter? an.: the man we thought he was 
from the beginning. here is polyneices. 

polyneices: 

what shall i do? sisters, what shall i do? 

weep for myself, or weep for what i see? 

my father— how he has suffered!— old, an exile 

in a strange land with only you. in rags, 

foul rags that have infected him for years. 1200 

120 



oedipus at colonus 

blinded. his tangled hair stirred by the wind. 

his scraps of food to stay his pitiful hunger 

no better than all the rest. this i have learned 

too late, too late. no man alive has been 

so vile as i have in neglecting you. 

i will bear witness to my own misdeeds. 

yet zeus himself, in everything he does, 

has mercy seated by him on his throne. 

may she then come and stand beside you also. 

there may be remedy for the wrongs i did you. 1210 

they can be made no worse. why are you silent? 

speak to me, father! do not turn away! 

what! send me off? dishonor me? not a word 

to explain your anger? sisters, he is your father. 

get him to change his mind. get him to break 

his stern, forbidding silence. do not let him 

dismiss a suppliant in disgrace, unanswered. 

antigone: 

tell him yourself what sad necessity 
has brought you here. something in your appeal 
may kindle happiness within his heart, 1220 

or your own indignation or compassion 
may move even those who are voiceless to reply. 
polyneices: 

yes, you are right, antigone, i will speak, 

but first i claim protection from the god 

before whose altar i was found. your king 

promised that i could come to talk with you 

and leave unharmed. i beg you father, sisters, 

strangers— i beg you all to keep this promise 

inviolate. now, father, let me tell you 

why i have come. i am a fugitive 1230 

because i claimed my right, as first-born son, 

to assume your kingship. therefore my young brother 

drove me away. eteocles was victorious 

neither by argument nor by force of arms, 

but by persuading thebes to take his part. 

the furies brought this curse upon your house. 

so i supposed, and so the oracles told me 

in dorian argos. there it was i swore 

a solemn oath with the most famous warriors 

of all the apian land to join with them 1240 

in leading a seven-fold army against thebes, 

and either dying in a righteous cause, 

or driving out that scoundrel from the country. 

what brings me here, then? father, i have come 

121 



sophocles 

\\ ith heartfelt prayers to you, mine and my alius', 
\\ ho no\» , the leaders of our se\ en armies, 
circle the rheban plain: amphiaraus, 
spearman and augurer without an equal; 
1 ydeus, the son of oeneus, from aetolia; 
argive eteoclus; hippomedon, 1250 

sent by his father talaos; capaneus, 
boasting that ik- will burn 1 hebes to the ground; 
parthenopaeus of arcadia, 
n. micd alter atalanta, long a virgin 
until she- gave birth to him, her faithful son; 
and i, your son, or yours in name at least, 
even if evil destiny begot me. 
\\ e are the leaders of the argive army 
that fearlessly is marching against thebes. 

and we implore you, father, all of us, 1260 

for your own sake and for your daughters' sake, 
not to be bitter, not to be angry with me, 
now that i seek revenge against my brother, 
a brother who has robbed me and dispossessed me. 
for if there is any truth in oracles, 
victory conies to those whom you befriend. 
therefore i beg you, by all our country's gods, 
by our hallowed springs, to hear me, to give way. 
like you, i am a beggar and an outcast. 

like you, i win a home by flattering others, 1270 

while back in thebes— how can i bear the thought? — 
eteocles, puffed up with pride, is king 
and laughs at both of us. but if you help me, 
i w ill at one stroke bring him down in ruins, 
drive him to exile, establish you again 
in your own home, and take my proper place. 
give your assent, and i make good my boast. 
i cannot otherwise return alive. 
chorus: 

speak to him, oedipus, as you think best, 

but for the king's sake, who has sent him here, 1280 

do not dismiss the man without an answer. 

oedipus: 

elders, if anyone except the king 

had sent him here for us to talk together, 

he would never have heard my voice. but as it is, 

he will be given that honor before he goes, 

and what he hears will afford him little pleasure. 

you utter scoundrel! when you were the king of thebes, 

as your brother is today, you were the one 

122 



oedipus at colonus 

who forced me into exile, your own father. 

you robbed me of my country; you compelled me 1290 

to wear the tatters that you weep to see, 

now that you live in wretchedness like mine. 

i have long since ceased to weep. i bear this burden 

as long as my life lasts, and never, never 

do i forget that you are a murderer. 

for it is you who have dragged me down to this: 

you who have thrust me from my home; you, you 

who are responsible for my wandering, 

my begging strangers for my daily bread. 

i might have died for all you did to help me, 1300 

except for these two daughters. they have nursed me, 

preserved me, tended me, shared in mv hardships 

like men and not like women. as for you, 

you and your brother are no sons of mine. 

the god of vengeance sees you, but his gaze 

will grow yet fiercer if in truth those armies 

are marching against thebes. for you will never 

capture that city. rather you will die 

bathed in eteocles' blood, and he in yours. 

i cursed you two. i curse you now again. 1 3 10 

for you, unlike your sisters, must be taught 

to honor parenthood, taught not to scorn 

so utterly as you have your sightless father. 

scorn from such sons! my curses have control 

over your suppliance and your talk of thrones, 

if truly ancient justice sits with zeus 

under the sanction of the eternal laws. 

no man on earth could be as vile as you! 

i cast you off with loathing, i disown you. 

go! with this final curse called down upon you. 1320 

i pray the gods that you may never conquer 

your people or their city, never return 

alive to the vale of argos. may you kill 

the brother who has driven you from your country, 

and die vourself, struck down by your brother's hand. 

i call on darkness, the primeval father, 

to bring you to the hateful gloom of hades. 

i call on the dread goddesses of this place. 

i call on ares the destrover, he 

who put this bitter hatred in your hearts. 1330 

now go, since i have spoken to vou. go 

publish these words of mine to all the thebans, 

and tell your trusty allies these are the honors 

that oedipus has bestowed upon his sons. 

123 



sophocles 

i hofti b: 

we cannot approve your journeys, polyneices, 
ro argos or ( olonus. ( jo at once. 

polyneices 

all come to nothing! all our hopes, our efforts! 
\\ hen we set out from argos, what a goal 

we w ere to reach! this goal! i do nor dare 

speak of it to my friends or turn them back. 1340 

1 must go on in silence to my fate. 

antigone, lsiuene, \mi have heard 

i lis [utter curses, his unmerciful prayer. 

if he can bring to pass these dreadful things, 

if irou return to thebes, by all the gods! 

let me not be dishonored, bury me, 

give me the funeral rites that i should have. 

you have been praised already for what you did 

to help your father, and what you do for me 

will win you added praise no less deserved. 1350 

antigone: 

brother, i ask only one thing of you. 

polyneices: 

dearest antigone, what is it? tell me. 
•w rigone: 

turn back your army to argos. now. at once. 
do not destroy yourself and ruin thebes. 

polyneices: 

impossible. how could i ever again 

command that army once i had proved a coward? 

antigone: 

but why should you grow angry ever again? 
what would you gain by laying waste your city? 

polyneices: 

my life is shameful. i am an exile, mocked 

by my younger brother— i, the eldest born. 1360 

antigone: 

do you see you are making your father's words come true? 
he has foretold that you will kill each other. 

polyneices: 

because he wishes it. i cannot yield. 

antigone: 

brother! brother! but who will dare to follow 
when he has heard what has been prophesied? 

polyneices: 

i will tell no one. a good leader's duty 

is to reveal what helps and not what hinders. 

antigone: 

are you determined to do this, polyneices? 
124 



oedipus at colonus 
polyneices: 

yes. do not hold me back. my time has come 

to take that dark, ill-fated journey, cursed 1370 

by my father and his furies. as for you two, 

may zeus be gracious to you, if you give me 

my rightful honors after i am dead, 

since while i live you can do nothing more. 

now, sister, let me go. bid me good-bye. 

you will not see me alive again, an.: no! no! 

polyneices: 

do not shed tears for me. an.: who would not weep 
to see you hurrying open-eyed to death? 

polyneices: 

if i must die, i must, an.: oh brother, listen! 

polyneices: 

only to what is right, an.: i cannot bear 1380 

the thought of losing you. poly.: fate will decide 
one way or the other. but i pray the gods 
you two at least may meet with no misfortune. 
no one believes that you deserve to suffer. 

exit polyneices 



chorus: 

even now we have heard the sightless stranger 
call down new curses heavy with pain. 

or it may be that fate on its course is keeping, 
for the gods' decrees are not uttered in vain. 

they are watched forever by time unsleeping- 
time, breaking today some fortunes asunder, 1390 

and raising others tomorrow on high. 

(a peal of thunder is heard) 

zeus defend us! that fearful thunder! 
it splits the sky! 

oedipus: 

children! children! have theseus brought to me! 
is there a messenger? the king should be here. 

antigone: 

why, father, why? what do you want of him? 

oedipus: 

with his swift thunder zeus has summoned me. 
i am to die. send for the king! send quickly! 

(a second peal of thunder) 

125 



sophocles 

tilokl v 

1 error grips me beyond all telling! 

:i zeus hurls his thunder! again! 1400 

fiercer the bolt falls! louder ir crashes! 

ah hair stirs with horror! never in vain 
\. ross the hea^ en the lightning flashes! 
what black event does its blaze betoken? 

what woe w ill follow its u rath let loose? 
m\ blood runs cold! the skv has spoken! 
spare us, o zeus' 

01 huh s: 

( ihildren, your lather's life draws to a close, 
he faces his inevitable end. 

an i lcos 1 : 

1 low have you learned this? why are you so sure? 1410 

oedipls: 

1 know beyond all doubt. lose not a moment. 
let someone go and bring king theseus here. 

(a third peal of thunder) 

chorus: 

once more, once more! 
the world is ringing with that hideous roar! 
zeus, if thou bringest evil on our land, 

o stay thy hand! 
be merciful to us. free us from our fear. 
thy doom has come upon this stranger here. 
let it not now descend upon us all. 

to thee, lord zeus, to thee we call! 1420 

oedipus: 

child, has he come? will i be still alive, 

by the time he gets here? will i have gone mad? 

antigone: 

what comfort, what assurance can he give you? 

oedipus: 

when he protected me, i promised him 
due recompense, and i would keep my word. 
chorus: 

theseus, my son! 
if you are honoring the god, have done 
with any sacrifice you might have made, 

deep in the glade. 
come quickly! you, and all who are your own, '43° 

win the reward of kindness you have shown, 
share in the blessing oedipus will bring. 
make haste, make haste to us, o king! 



126 



oedipus at colonus 

enter theseus 

theseus: 

i have heard your summons, oedipus, and yours, 

men of colonus. why are you so anxious? 

is it the thunder or a burst of hail? 

for all of us have reason to be fearful 

when heaven sends down a storm like this upon us. 

oedipus: 

welcome, king theseus! i have been longing for you. 
the gods will bless you for your coming here. 1440 

theseus: 

what is it, son of laius? what has happened? 

oedipus: 

i have reached life's utmost verge. before i die 
i wish to keep the promise that i made you. 
theseus: 

how can you be so certain of your fate? 

oedipus: 

the gods themselves have heralded their tidings. 
they have fulfilled what they long since foretold. 
theseus: 

what are the signs that have made their purpose clear? 

oedipus: 

long peals of thunder; flash after flash of lightning, 
hurled by the hand of strength invincible. 
theseus: 

i cannot doubt you. i have already heard you 1450 

prophesy truly. tell me what i must do. 

oedipus: 

your city, son of aegeus, will store up 

what i am now to show you as a treasure 

beyond the reach of time. i need no guide, 

for i, unaided, will lead you to the place 

where i must die. never to mortal man 

make known its secret, so that forevermore 

it may safeguard you better than a wall 

of native shields, better than alien spears 

of neighboring allies. there, a mystery, 1460 

too sacred to be given utterance, 

will be unfolded only to you king theseus. 

i cannot tell your people or my children, 

dear though they are to me. no, you alone 

must guard this revelation till your life 

draws to a close, and then to your successor, 

to him, alone, disclose it. let him likewise 

instruct his heir, and so through future ages. 

127 



chorus: 



sophocles 

then will this city be secure frum thebes, 

the dragon's brood. for states will wantonly 1470 

insult their innocent neighbors since they know 

["he gods, though sure, are siom to punish men 

who in their frenzy slight religious duty. 

m.i\ such a fate as that never befall you! 

all this \ 011 know. i have no need to tell you. 

bur the gods call. i have felt their urgent summons. 

1 et us no longer shrink or hesitate. 

follow me, children. now, in some strange manner, 

1 am the guide of those who guided me. 

do not so much as lay a finger on me. 1480 

i make my own way to that sacred tomb 

where destiny has decreed that i be buried. 

come here! come here! hermes and the great goddess 

ruling in hades lead me on. o light, 

long lost to me, once mine in olden days! 

for the last time my living body feels you, 

as the dark underworld envelops me. 

o friend most dear to me! may all good fortune 

come to your land, your followers, and you! 

and that your happiness may evermore 1490 

be at its height, remember me, the dead. 

exeunt oedipus, theseus, antigone, ismene 

if any prayer may be addressed to thee, 

hear us, persephone, 
dread goddess hidden from our mortal sight! 
lord hades, hear, god of the land of night! 

grant that our friend may go, 
not sorrowful, not suffering from his doom, 

down to the dead below, 
down to the stvgian fields' enshrouding gloom. 

from his unmerited misery 1500 

may the gods now in justice set him free. 

avenging furies in your dark domain, 

have pity on his pain! 
unconquered cerberus, who dost lie in wait 
guarding that wide and ever-welcoming gate, 

snarling within thy lair, 
thou mighty monster, be thou good to us! 

o death, hear thou our praver, 
thou terrible son of earth and tartarus! 

make clear his pathway to the deep 15 10 

o thou, the giver of eternal sleep. 

128 



oedipus at colon us 

enter messenger 

messsenger: 

my friends, this is the substance of my message: 
oedipus is no more. but the whole story 
of all that has taken place cannot be brief. 

chorus: 

he is no longer suffering? he is dead? 

messsenger: 

you may be certain his last day has come. 

chorus: 

what did the gods decree? a painless doom? 

messsenger: 

wonderful things have happened. you all know, 

since you were here yourselves, how oedipus left you 

with no one guiding him, for he himself 1520 

showed us the way. now when he reached the chasm 

where the bronze steps lead down precipitously, 

he paused by one of many branching paths 

by the rock-basin, the memorial 

of the unbroken pact peirithous 

made with king theseus. there he stood midway 

between this basin, the thorician stone, 

the hollow pear-tree, and the marble tomb. 

then he sat down, loosened his sordid garments, 

and summoning his daughters, bade them bring him 1530 

water from some pure spring, that he might wash 

and pour out a drink-offering to the dead. 

so from demeter's hillside, close at hand, 

quickly they brought all that their father asked for, 

washed him, and clothed him as is customary, 

neglecting nothing that could satisfy him. 

then the god thundered, zeus of the world of darkness. 

the two girls, shuddering, fell at their father's knees, 

burst into tears, and beat their breasts, lamenting 

loudly and long. at their sharp, sudden cry 1540 

he folded them in his arms. 'children,' he said, 

'you have no father now. my life is over, 

and your sad task of tending me is done, 

a heavy burden, i know, for you to bear. 

yet there is one word— love— that makes the hardships 

that you have suffered seem of no importance. 

no one has given you love as great as mine. 

now you must live without me through the years 

that are before you.' so in the utmost grief 

they all embraced. at last their tears ceased flowing, 1550 

their loud sobs died away, and there was silence. 

129 



sophocles 

1 hen suddenl) a terrifying voice, 
\ god s voice echoing and re-echoing, 
standing their hair on end, rang out in summons: 
'oedipus, oedipus, why do we delay? 
ajread) you have lingered here too long.' 
knowing .1 god had called him, oedipus 
asked i heseus to draw near, and .it his coining 
s.iid to him, 'dearest friend, here arc- my daughters. 
givel hem your hand— and children, give him yours— 1560 

promise me always to be kind to them, 
always to do vi hat you think best for them.' 
checking his grief, high-minded as he is, 
king theseus made this promise. thereupon, 
oedipus, groping blindly for his daughters, 
said to them, 'children, courage! you must go. 
do not ask to see or hear forbidden things. 
leave this place quickly, but let the king remain, 
whose right it is to witness what will happen.' 
1 baring him speak these words, we turned away 1570 

with the two women, weeping bitterly. 
and then, a little later, we looked back. 
there was no sign of oedipus to be seen, 
and theseus stood with his hand before his face, 
shielding his eyes, like one who beheld some sight 
so awful as to be unendurable. 
then he began to pray, bowing in worship 
of earth and of the heavens. in what manner 
oedipus met his doom no mortal knows 

other than theseus. in that final moment, 1580 

no flash of lightning made an end of him, 
nor sudden tempest springing from the sea. 
either some messenger of the gods arrived, 
or the foundations of the earth split open 
to take him without pain, indulgently. 
his going was not marked by lamentation, 
sickness, or suffering. no one has ever met 
an end so marvelous. if anyone here 
feels that such things are unbelievable, 

i will not try to persuade him of their truth. 1590 

chorus: 

where are the women now? where are their friends? 

messsenger: 

they are not far away. the sounds of mourning, 
broken and indistinct, tell they are coming. 



130 



oedipus at colonus 



antigone: 



chorus: 
chorus: 



ismene: 



chorus: 



enter antigone and ismene 

gone! gone! he is gone! most miserable are we, 

wailing with grief's full flood 
the fatal heritage of our father's blood. 

for his sake, in the past, 
of his unending pain we endured our share. 

and now, now at the last, 
beyond belief is the sight we have had to see, 1600 

beyond belief the loss we have had to bear. 
what loss, my child? an.: that we can never know. 

then he is gone? an.: as you would want him to go. 
for not in battle, not in the salt sea wave, 

did he cease to be; 
but strangely and swiftly he was snatched away 

to those dim fields far from the light of day. 
we are in darkness, the darkness of the grave! 

how shall we live, in our extremity 
evermore wandering over land and sea? 16 10 

i do not know. would that my life might end, 
end in the depths of hades, with my father! 

the life that lies ahead cannot be borne. 
kindest and best of daughters, you have been blameless. 

do not too long, too passionately mourn. 
men must accept what fate the gods may send. 



antigone: ah! now at length i have come to find it true: 
we long to have again 
the vanished past, in spite of all its pain. 

to hold him in my embrace 1620 

was to find happiness at the heart of woe. 

though we see no more your face, 
still, father, still our love goes out to you, 

even to the darkness of the world below. 
the world below? an.: at long last he is there. 

he has found rest? an.: rest in the shadowed air 
that he has yearned for, in the nether deep, 

where the dead abide. 
and i abide here in mv bitter grief! 

when from this anguish will i find relief? 1630 

o father! father! when will i cease to weep? 

you had your wish: in a strange land you died. 
but i was not there! not there! not at your side! 

what new misfortunes are before us still, 
now we are left alone, homeless, and orphaned? 
sister, what has the future now in store? 



chorus: 
chorus: 



ismene: 



131 



sophocles 



iiioki s: 



\s 1 i(..'\l : 
.s\ii si : 
an i icon] . 

ismene: 

ismen1 : 
antigone: 

ismene: 

ismene: 

antigone: 

ismene: 



painlessly, blessedly, his life 1ms ended. 

children, give way to this lament no more. 
ne\ 1 1 i^ man be\ ond the reach of ill. 

( cine hack, come back, ismene! come with me! 1640 

what will you do? an.: a fever consumes me. is.: sister! 

i here is one dark resting-place that i must see. 
antigone! \\ hose? an.: you know it is our father's. 

we cannot. you heard the command our father gave. 
why are you disapproving? why do you speak so? 

we were to leave— an.: what more have you to say? 
he was to die alone, without a grave. 

then take me to the spot and let me perish! 
i low can i live? where can i make my way, 

friendless and helpless? 1650 



chorus: do not grieve so, my child. you need not fear. 

ismene: but where shall i fly? ch.: you have a refuge, is.: refuge? 

chorus: here in our midst. no harm can touch you here. 

ismene: i am sure of that, ch.: then tell me why you are troubled. 

ismene: i long to go home, to go home! but i know not how. 

chorus: do not go home. stay with us here in safety. 

ismene: harsh, harsh is our fate, ch.: blow upon grievous blow. 

ismene: hopeless before, and worse than hopeless now. 

chorus: trulv a sea of sorrow broke upon you. 

ismene: what can we do? zeus! zeus! where can we go? 1660 
what hope is left us? 



enter theseus 

theseus: 

my daughters, weep no more. the gods of hades 
have shown their great beneficence to us all, 
the living and the dead. further lament 
would bring their anger down upon our heads. 

antigone: 

hear, son of aegeus! hear our supplication! 

theseus: 

what would you ask of me, antigone? 

antigone: 

that we ourselves might see our father's grave. 

theseus: 

i cannot let you, child. it is forbidden. 

antigone: 

how can that be, o king, o lord of athens? 



1670 



132 



oedipus at colonus 
theseus: 

daughters, your father laid this charge upon me: 
no one was to draw near his resting place, 
no utterance was to break the holy silence. 
if i performed this duty faithfully, 
i would preserve my country from all harm. 
these things i promised him, and the great gods 
before whom oaths are sacred heard me swear. 

antigone: 

i say no more. what was our father's pleasure 

must satisfy us. send us back to thebes, 

our ancient land, for there we yet may save 1680 

our brothers from the death that threatens them. 

theseus: 

yes, you shall go. i will not spare myself 
in giving you whatever help i can, 
for your sakes and for his whom death has taken. 
chorus: 

come, daughters. cease to grieve, cease to lament. 
no longer mourn for him, no longer wail. 

these things have been established. be content. 
for what the gods establish cannot fail. 


