


[CHARACTER] 
the key events in the formation of jake's character occur
long before the novel's action begins. as a soldier in world war
i, jake is wounded. although he does not say so directly, there
are numerous moments in the novel when he implies that, as a result
of his injury, he has lost the ability to have sex. jake's narration
is characterized by subtlety and implication. he prefers to hint
at things rather than state them outright, especially when they
concern the war or his injury. early in the novel, for example one
must read the text very closely to grasp the true nature of jake's
wound; it is only later, when jake goes fishing with bill, that
he speaks more openly about his impotence.

	jake's physical malady has profound psychological consequences.
he seems quite insecure about his masculinity. the fact that brett,
the love of his life, refuses to enter into a relationship with him
compounds this problem. jake, with typical subtlety, suggests that
she does not want to because it would mean giving up sexual intercourse.
jake's hostility toward robert cohn is perhaps rooted in his own
feelings of inadequacy. in many ways, jake is a typical member of
what poet gertrude stein called the "lost generation," the generation
of men and women whose experiences in world war i undermined their
belief in justice, morality, manhood, and love. without these ideals
to rely on, the lost generation lived an aimless, immoral existence,
devoid of true emotion and characterized by casual interpersonal
cruelty. part of jake's character represents the lost generation
and its unfortunate position: he wanders through paris, going from
bar to bar and drinking heavily at each, his life filled with purposeless
debauchery. he demonstrates the capacity to be extremely cruel,
especially toward cohn. his insecurities about his masculinity are
typical of the anxieties that many members of the lost generation
felt.
	yet, in some important ways, jake differs from those
around him. he seems aware of the fruitlessness of the lost generation's way
of life. he tells cohn in chapter ii: "you can't get away from yourself
by moving from one place to another." moreover, he recognizes the
frequent cruelty of the behavior in which he and his friends engage.
most important, perhaps, he acknowledges, if only indirectly, the
pain that his war injury and his unrequited love for brett cause
him. however, though jake does perceive the problems in his life,
he seems either unwilling or unable to remedy them. though he understands
the dilemma of the lost generation, he remains trapped within it.
