


[CHARACTER]
[CHARACTER] is tommo's love. she is graceful and beautiful, with blue eyes, dewy olive skin, and dark, long tresses that frequently glimmer with coconut oil. [CHARACTER]'s every gesture and actions suggests her innocence. although tommo is surrounded by numerous lovely, half-dressed maidens, [CHARACTER]'s form of beauty and innocence makes her his chosen one. tommo sees her as a veritable child of eden. [CHARACTER] essentially is the equivalent of "eve," to tommo's "adam."
while [CHARACTER] plays an important symbolic role with her innocence, her character is never developed. she rarely speaks and her inner thoughts are never shown. she appears kind because she does not act in an unkind manner, yet the motivation behind all of her actions is not clear. we never actually know if she likes tommo. what she does all day long is never mentioned. the only thing we know about her is that tommo admires her greatly. she usually appears in the text only when tommo wants to profile her physical beauty. we may admire it as he does, but we unfortunately shall never know what goes on in her mind. [CHARACTER] will remain for the entire story a symbol, not a strong three-dimensional character.
toby

toby is a young quiet man who agrees to accompany the narrator on his adventure. little is known about him. we are never told what toby actually thinks. furthermore, although toby accompanies the narrator for most of the tale, he rarely speaks. the narrator says that toby is quiet, that he occasionally smiles, and that he never discusses his history. most critics see toby as a two- dimensional character whose sole purpose is to provide a contrast to tommo. as they adventure together, toby generally perceives things in an opposite manner from tommo. when toby believes that the natives are happars, tommo senses that they are typees. even though toby is constantly skeptical, tommo begins to enjoy himself. although toby seems like a perfectly nice person, the limited development of his character makes it difficult to say that we truly know him. he, like many of the other figures, seems to play a primarily symbolic role. he represents the european ideology that tommo is willing to give up once in the typee valley. although tommo becomes open-minded, toby does not. toby remains skeptical as most americans would be. toby never opens himself to appreciate the civility of the native life.
