The Story of an Hour  
By Kate Chopin (1894) 

 
Knowing that Mrs. Mallard was afflicted with a heart trouble, great care was taken to break to her as 
gently as possible the news of her husband's death.  

It was her sister Josephine who told her, in broken sentences; veiled hints that revealed in half concealing. 
Her husband's friend Richards was there, too, near her. It was he who had been in the newspaper office 
when intelligence of the railroad disaster was received, with Brently Mallard's name leading the list of 
"killed." He had only taken the time to assure himself of its truth by a second telegram, and had hastened 
to forestall any less careful, less tender friend in bearing the sad message.  

She did not hear the story as many women have heard the same, with a paralyzed inability to accept its 
significance. She wept at once, with sudden, wild abandonment, in her sister's arms. When the storm of 
grief had spent itself she went away to her room alone. She would have no one follow her.  

There stood, facing the open window, a comfortable, roomy armchair. Into this she sank, pressed down by 
a physical exhaustion that haunted her body and seemed to reach into her soul.  

She could see in the open square before her house the tops of trees that were all aquiver with the new 
spring life. The delicious breath of rain was in the air. In the street below a peddler was crying his wares. 
The notes of a distant song which some one was singing reached her faintly, and countless sparrows were 
twittering in the eaves.  

There were patches of blue sky showing here and there through the clouds that had met and piled one 
above the other in the west facing her window.  

She sat with her head thrown back upon the cushion of the chair, quite motionless, except when a sob 
came up into her throat and shook her, as a child who has cried itself to sleep continues to sob in its 
dreams.  

She was young, with a fair, calm face, whose lines bespoke repression and even a certain strength. But 
now there was a dull stare in her eyes, whose gaze was fixed away off yonder on one of those patches of 
blue sky. It was not a glance of reflection, but rather indicated a suspension of intelligent thought.  

There was something coming to her and she was waiting for it, fearfully. What was it? She did not know; 
it was too subtle and elusive to name. But she felt it, creeping out of the sky, reaching toward her through 
the sounds, the scents, the color that filled the air.  

Now her bosom rose and fell tumultuously. She was beginning to recognize this thing that was 
approaching to possess her, and she was striving to beat it back with her will--as powerless as her two 
white slender hands would have been. When she abandoned herself a little whispered word escaped her 
slightly parted lips. She said it over and over under the breath: "free, free, free!" The vacant stare and the 
look of terror that had followed it went from her eyes. They stayed keen and bright. Her pulses beat fast, 
and the coursing blood warmed and relaxed every inch of her body.  

She did not stop to ask if it were or were not a monstrous joy that held her. A clear and exalted perception 
enabled her to dismiss the suggestion as trivial. She knew that she would weep again when she saw the 
kind, tender hands folded in death; the face that had never looked save with love upon her, fixed and gray 

and dead. But she saw beyond that bitter moment a long procession of years to come that would belong to 
her absolutely. And she opened and spread her arms out to them in welcome.  

There would be no one to live for during those coming years; she would live for herself. There would be 
no powerful will bending hers in that blind persistence with which men and women believe they have a 
right to impose a private will upon a fellow-creature. A kind intention or a cruel intention made the act 
seem no less a crime as she looked upon it in that brief moment of illumination.  

And yet she had loved him--sometimes. Often she had not. What did it matter! What could love, the 
unsolved mystery, count for in the face of this possession of self-assertion which she suddenly recognized 
as the strongest impulse of her being!  

"Free! Body and soul free!" she kept whispering.  

Josephine was kneeling before the closed door with her lips to the keyhole, imploring for admission. 
"Louise, open the door! I beg; open the door--you will make yourself ill. What are you doing, Louise? For 
heaven's sake open the door."  

"Go away. I am not making myself ill." No; she was drinking in a very elixir of life through that open 
window.  

Her fancy was running riot along those days ahead of her. Spring days, and summer days, and all sorts of 
days that would be her own. She breathed a quick prayer that life might be long. It was only yesterday she 
had thought with a shudder that life might be long.  

She arose at length and opened the door to her sister's importunities. There was a feverish triumph in her 
eyes, and she carried herself unwittingly like a goddess of Victory. She clasped her sister's waist, and 
together they descended the stairs. Richards stood waiting for them at the bottom.  

Someone was opening the front door with a latchkey. It was Brently Mallard who entered, a little travel-
stained, composedly carrying his grip-sack and umbrella. He had been far from the scene of the accident, 
and did not even know there had been one. He stood amazed at Josephine's piercing cry; at Richards' 
quick motion to screen him from the view of his wife.  

When the doctors came they said she had died of heart disease--of the joy that kills.  

 

 

Appointment with Love 

By S.L Kishor 

Six minutes to six, said the great round clock over the information booth in Grand Central Station. The 
tall young army lieutenant who had just come from the direction of the tracks lifted his sunburned face, 
and his eyes narrowed to note the exact time. His heart was pounding with a beat that shocked him 
because he could not control it. In six minutes he would see the woman who had filled such a special 
place in his life for the past thirteen months, the woman he had never seen, yet whose written words had 
been with him and sustained him unfailingly. 

He placed himself as close as he could to the information booth, just beyond the ring of people besieging 
the clerks. 

Lieutenant Blandford remembered one night in particular, the worst of the fighting, when his plane had 
been caught in the midst of a pack of Zeros. He had seen the grinning face of one of the enemy pilots. 

In one of his letters he had confessed to her that he often felt fear, and only a few days before this battle, 
he had received her answer. "Of course you fear ... all brave men do. Didn't King David know fear? That's 
why he wrote the Twenty-third Psalm. Next time you doubt yourself, I want you to hear my voice reciting 
to you: "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil, for Thou art 
with me..." And he had remembered, he had heard her imagined voice, and it had renewed his strength 
and skill. 

Now he was going to hear her real voice. Four minutes to six. His face grew sharp. 

Under the immense, starred roof, people were walking fast, like threads of color being woven into a gray 
web. A girl passed close to him and Lieutenant Blandford started. She was wearing a red flower in her 
suit lapel, but it was a crimson sweet pea, not the little red rose they had agreed upon. Besides, this girl 
was too young about eighteen, whereas Hollis Meynell had frankly told him she was thirty. "Well, what 
of it?" he had answered. "I'm thirty-two." He was twenty-nine. 

His mind went back to that book — the book the Lord Himself must have put into his hands out of the 
hundreds of army library books sent to the Florida training camp, Of Human Bondage, it was; and 
throughout the book were notes in a woman's writing. He had always hated that writing-in-habit but these 
remarks were different. He had never believed that a woman could see into a man's heart so tenderly, so 
understandingly. Her name was the bookplate: Hollis Meynell. He had got hold of a New York City 
telephone phone book and found her address. He had written, she had answer. Next day he had been 
shipped out but they had gone on writing. 

For thirteen months, she had faithfully replied, and more than reply. When his letters did not arrive, she 
wrote anyway, and now he believed | loved her, and she loved him.  

But she had refused all his pleas to send him her photograph. That seemed rather bad, of course. But she 
had explained: "If your feeling for me has any reality, any honest basis, what I look like won't matter. 
Suppose I'm beautiful. I'd always be haunted by the feeling that you had been taking chance on just that, 
and that kind of love would disgust me. Suppose I’m plain (and you must admit that this is more likely). 
Then I'd always fear you were going on writing to me only because you were lonely and had no one else. 
No, don't ask for my picture. When you come to New York, you see me and then you shall make your 
decision. Remember, both of us are free to stop or to go on after that — whichever we choose..." 

The girl in the green suit was walking quickly away. 

One minute to six... 

Then Lieutenant Blandford's heart leaped higher than his plane had ever done. 

A young woman was coming toward him. Her figure was long and slim, her blond hair lay back in curls 
from her delicate ears. Her eyes were blue flowers; her lips and chin had a gentle firmness. In her pale 
green suit she was like springtime come alive. 

He started toward her, entirely forgetting to notice that she was wearing no rose, and as he moved, a 
small, provocative smile curved her lips.  

"Going my way, soldier?" she murmured. 

Uncontrollably, he made one step closer to her. Then he saw Ho Meynell. 

She was standing almost directly behind the girl, a woman well p forty, her graying hair tucked under a 
worn hat. She was more than plump; her thick-ankled feet were thrust into low-heeled shoes. But wore a 
red rose in the rumpled lapel of her brown coat. 

The girl in the green suit was walking quickly away. Blandford felt as though he were being split in two, 
so keen was his desire to follow the girl, yet so deep was his longing for the woman whose spirit had truly 
companioned and upheld his own; and there she stood. Her pale, plump face was gentle and sensible; he 
could see that now. Her gray eyes had a warm, kindly twinkle. 

Lieutenant Blandford did not hesitate. His fingers gripped the small, worn, blue leather copy of Of Human 
Bondage which was to identify him to her. This would not be love, but it would be something precious, 
something perhaps even rarer than love — a friendship for which he had been and must ever be grateful... 

He squared his broad shoulders, saluted, and held the book out toward the woman, although even while he 
spoke he felt choked by the bitterness of his disappointment. 

"I'm Lieutenant John Blandford, and you — you are Miss Meynell. I'm so glad you could meet me. May -
— may I take you to dinner?" The woman's face broadened in a tolerant smile. "I don't know what this is 
all about, son," she answered. "That young lady in the green suit — the one who just went by — begged 
me to wear this rose on my coat. And she said that if you asked me to go out with you, I should tell you 
that she's waiting for you in that big restaurant across the street. She said it was some kind of a test. I've 
got two boys with Uncle Sam myself, so I didn't mind to oblige you." 

 

 

The Chaser  
By John Collier 

 
Alan Austen, as nervous as a kitten, went up certain dark and creaky stairs in the neighborhood of Pell 
Street, and peered about for a long time on the dime landing before he found the name he wanted written 
obscurely on one of the doors.  
 
He pushed open this door, as he had been told to do, and found himself in a tiny room, which contained 
no furniture but a plain kitchen table, a rocking-chair, and an ordinary chair. On one of the dirty buff-
coloured walls were a couple of shelves, containing in all perhaps a dozen bottles and jars. An old man sat 
in the rocking-chair, reading a newspaper. Alan, without a word, handed him the card he had been given.  
 
"Sit down, Mr. Austen," said the old man very politely.  
 
"I am glad to make your acquaintance."  
 
"Is it true," asked Alan, "that you have a certain mixture that has-er-quite extraordinary effects?"  
 
"My dear sir," replied the old man, "my stock in trade is not very large-I don't deal in laxatives and 
teething mixtures-but such as it is, it is varied. I think nothing I sell has effects which could be precisely 
described as ordinary."  
 
"Well, the fact is. . ." began Alan.  
 
"Here, for example," interrupted the old man, reaching for a bottle from the shelf. "Here is a liquid as 
colourless as water, almost tasteless, quite imperceptible in coffee, wine, or any other beverage. It is also 
quite imperceptible to any known method of autopsy."  
 
"Do you mean it is a poison?" cried Alan, very much horrified.  
 
"Call it a glove-cleaner if you like," said the old man indifferently. "Maybe it will clean gloves. I have 
never tried. One might call it a life-cleaner. Lives need cleaning sometimes."  
 
"I want nothing of that sort," said Alan.  
 
"Probably it is just as well," said the old man. "Do you know the price of this? For one teaspoonful, which 
is sufficient, I ask five thousand dollars. Never less. Not a penny less."  
 
"I hope all your mixtures are not as expensive," said Alan apprehensively.  
 
"Oh dear, no," said the old man. "It would be no good charging that sort of price for a love potion, for 
example. Young people who need a love potion very seldom have five thousand dollars. Otherwise they 
would not need a love potion."  
 
"I am glad to hear that," said Alan.  
 
"I look at it like this," said the old man. "Please a customer with one article, and he will come back when 
he needs another. Even if it is more costly. He will save up for it, if necessary."  
 
"So," said Alan, "you really do sell love potions?"  
 

"If I did not sell love potions," said the old man, reaching for another bottle, "I should not have mentioned 
the other matter to you. It is only when one is in a position to oblige that one can afford to be so 
confidential."  
 
"And these potions," said Alan. "They are not just-just-er-"  
 
"Oh, no," said the old man. "Their effects are permanent, and extend far beyond the mere casual impulse. 
But they include it. Oh, yes they include it. Bountifully, insistently. Everlastingly."  
 
"Dear me!" said Alan, attempting a look of scientific detachment. "How very interesting!"  
 
"But consider the spiritual side," said the old man.  
 
"I do, indeed," said Alan.  
 
"For indifference," said the old man, they substitute devotion. For scorn, adoration. Give one tiny measure 
of this to the young lady-its flavour is imperceptible in orange juice, soup, or cocktails-and however gay 
and giddy she is, she will change altogether. She will want nothing but solitude and you."  
 
"I can hardly believe it," said Alan. "She is so fond of parties."  
 
"She will not like them any more," said the old man. "She will be afraid of the pretty girls you may meet."  
 
"She will actually be jealous?" cried Alan in a rapture. "Of me?"  
 
"Yes, she will want to be everything to you."  
 
"She is, already. Only she doesn't care about it."  
 
"She will, when she has taken this. She will care intensely. You will be her sole interest in life."  
 
"Wonderful!" cried Alan.  
 
"She will want to know all you do," said the old man. "All that has happened to you during the day. Every 
word of it. She will want to know what you are thinking about, why you smile suddenly, why you are 
looking sad."  
 
"That is love!" cried Alan.  
 
"Yes," said the old man. "How carefully she will look after you! She will never allow you to be tired, to 
sit in a draught, to neglect your food. If you are an hour late, she will be terrified. She will think you are 
killed, or that some siren has caught you."  
 
"I can hardly imagine Diana like that!" cried Alan, overwhelmed with joy.  
 
"You will not have to use your imagination," said the old man. "And, by the way, since there are always 
sirens, if by any chance you should, later on, slip a little, you need not worry. She will forgive you, in the 
end. She will be terribly hurt, of course, but she will forgive you-in the end."  
 
"That will not happen," said Alan fervently.  
 

"Of course not," said the old man. "But, if it did, you need not worry. She would never divorce you. Oh, 
no! And, of course, she will never give you the least, the very least, grounds for uneasiness."  
 
"And how much," said Alan, "is this wonderful mixture?"  
 
"It is not as dear," said the old man, "as the glove-cleaner, or life-cleaner, as I sometimes call it. No. That 
is five thousand dollars, never a penny less. One has to be older than you are, to indulge in that sort of 
thing. One has to save up for it."  
 
"But the love potion?" said Alan.  
 
"Oh, that," said the old man, opening the drawer in the kitchen table, and taking out a tiny, rather dirty-
looking phial. "That is just a dollar."  
 
"I can't tell you how grateful I am," said Alan, watching him fill it.  
 
"I like to oblige," said the old man. "Then customers come back, later in life, when they are better off, and 
want more expensive things. Here you are. You will find it very effective."  
 
"Thank you again," said Alan. "Good-bye."  
 
"Au revoir," said the man. 
 

 

 

The Jockey 

By Carson McCullers 

The jockey came to the doorway of the dining room, then after a moment stepped to one side and stood 
motionless, with his back to the wall. The room was crowded, as this was the third day of the season 
and all the hotels in the town were full. In the dining room bouquets of August roses scattered their 
petals on the white table linen and from the adjoining bar came a warm, drunken wash of voices. The 
jockey waited with his back to the wall and scrutinized the room with pinched, crêpy eyes. He 
examined the room until at last his eyes reached a table in a corner diagonally across from him, at 
which three men were sitting. As he watched, the jockey raised his chin and tilted his head back to one 
side, his dwarfed body grew rigid, and his hands stiffened so that the fingers curled inward like gray 
claws. Tense against the wall of the dining room, he watched and waited in this way.  

He was wearing a suit of green Chinese silk that evening, tailored precisely and the size of a costume 
outfit for a child. The shirt was yellow, the tie striped with pastel colors. He had no hat with him and 
wore his hair brushed down in a stiff, wet bang on his forehead. His face was drawn, ageless, and gray. 
There were shadowed hollows at his temples and his mouth was set in a wiry smile. After a time he 
was aware that he had been seen by one of the three men he had been watching. But the jockey did not 
nod; he only raised his chin still higher and hooked the thumb of his tense hand in the pocket of his 
coat.  

The three men at the corner table were a trainer, a bookie, and a rich man. The trainer was Sylvester -- 
a large, loosely built fellow with a flushed nose and slow blue eyes. The bookie was Simmons. The 
rich man was the owner of a horse named Seltzer, which the jockey had ridden that afternoon. The 
three of them drank whiskey with soda, and a white-coated waiter had just brought on the main course 
of the dinner.  

It was Sylvester who first saw the jockey. He looked away quickly, put down his whiskey glass, and 
nervously mashed the tip of his red nose with his thumb. "It's Bitsy Barlow," he said. "Standing over 
there across the room. Just watching us."  

"Oh, the jockey," said the rich man. He was facing the wall and he half turned his head to look behind 
him. "Ask him over."  

"God no," Sylvester said.  

"He's crazy," Simmons said. The bookie's voice was flat and without inflection. He had the face of a 
born gambler, carefully adjusted, the expression a permanent deadlock between fear and greed.  

"Well, I wouldn't call him that exactly," said Sylvester. "I've known him a long time. He was O.K. until 
about six months ago. But if he goes on like this, I can't see him lasting another year. I just can't."  

"It was what happened in Miami," said Simmons.  

"What?" asked the rich man.  

Sylvester glanced across the room at the jockey and wet the corner of his mouth with his red, fleshy 
tongue. "A accident. A kid got hurt on the track. Broke a leg and a hip. He was a particular pal of 
Bitsy's. A Irish kid. Not a bad rider, either."  

"That's a pity," said the rich man.  

"Yeah. They were particular friends," Sylvester said. "You would always find him up in Bitsy's hotel 
room. They would be playing rummy or else lying on the floor reading the sports page together."  

"Well, those things happen," said the rich man.  

Simmons cut into his beefsteak. He held his fork prongs downward on the plate and carefully piled on 
mushrooms with the blade of his knife. "He's crazy," he repeated. "He gives me the creeps."  

All the tables in the dining room were occupied. There was a party at the banquet table in the center, 
and green-white August moths had found their way in from the night and fluttered about the clear 
candle flames. Two girls wearing flannel slacks and blazers walked arm in arm across the room into 
the bar. From the main street outside came the echoes of holiday hysteria.  

"They claim that in August Saratoga is the wealthiest town per capita in the world." Sylvester turned to 
the rich man. "What do you think?"  

"I wouldn't know," said the rich man. "It may very well be so."  

Daintily, Simmons wiped his greasy mouth with the tip of his forefinger. "How about Hollywood? And 
Wall Street --"  

"Wait," said Sylvester. "He's decided to come over here."  

The jockey had left the wall and was approaching the table in the corner. He walked with a prim strut, 
swinging out his legs in a half-circle with each step, his heels biting smartly into the red velvet carpet 
on the floor. On the way over he brushed against the elbow of a fat woman in white satin at the banquet 
table; he stepped back and bowed with dandified courtesy, his eyes quite closed. When he had crossed 
the room he drew up a chair and sat at a corner of the table, between Sylvester and the rich man, 
without a nod of greeting or a change in his set, gray face.  

"Had dinner?" Sylvester asked.  

"Some people might call it that." The jockey's voice was high, bitter, clear.  

Sylvester put his knife and fork down carefully on his plate. The rich man shifted his position, turning 
sidewise in his chair and crossing his legs. He was dressed in twill riding pants, unpolished boots, and 
a shabby brown jacket -- this was his outfit day and night in the racing season, although he was never 
seen on a horse. Simmons went on with his dinner.  

"Like a spot of seltzer water?" asked Sylvester. "Or something like that?"  

The jockey didn't answer. He drew a gold cigarette case from his pocket and snapped it open. Inside 
were a few cigarettes and a tiny gold penknife. He used the knife to cut a cigarette in half. When he 
had lighted his smoke he held up his hand to a waiter passing by the table. "Kentucky bourbon, please."  

"Now, listen, Kid," said Sylvester.  

"Don't Kid me."  

"Be reasonable. You know you got to behave reasonable."  

The jockey drew up the left corner of his mouth in a stiff jeer. His eyes lowered to the food spread out 
on the table, but instantly he looked up again. Before the rich man was a fish casserole, baked in a 
cream sauce and garnished with parsley. Sylvester had ordered eggs Benedict. There was asparagus, 
fresh buttered corn, and a side dish of wet black olives. A plate of French-fried potatoes was in the 
corner of the table before the jockey. He didn't look at the food again, but kept his pinched eyes on the 
center piece of full-blown lavender roses. "I don't suppose you remember a certain person by the name 
of McGuire," he said.  

"Now, listen," said Sylvester.  

The waiter brought the whiskey, and the jockey sat fondling the glass with his small, strong, callused 
hands. On his wrist was a gold link bracelet that clinked against the table edge. After turning the glass 
between his palms, the jockey suddenly drank the whiskey neat in two hard swallows. He set down the 
glass sharply. "No, I don't suppose your memory is that long and extensive," he said.  

"Sure enough, Bitsy," said Sylvester. "What makes you act like this? You hear from the kid today?"  

"I received a letter," the jockey said. "The certain person we were speaking about was taken out from 
the cast on Wednesday. One leg is two inches shorter than the other one. That's all."  

Sylvester clucked his tongue and shook his head. "I realize how you feel."  

"Do you?" The jockey was looking at the dishes on the table. His gaze passed from the fish casserole to 
the corn, and finally fixed on the plate of fried potatoes. His face tightened and quickly he looked up 
again. A rose shattered and he picked up one of the petals, bruised it between his thumb and forefinger, 
and put it in his mouth.  

"Well, those things happen," said the rich man.  

The trainer and the bookie had finished eating, but there was food left on the serving dishes before 
their plates. The rich man dipped his buttery fingers in his water glass and wiped them with his napkin.  

"Well," said the jockey. "Doesn't somebody want me to pass them something? Or maybe perhaps you 
desire to re-order. Another hunk of beefsteak, gentlemen, or --"  

"Please," said Sylvester. "Be reasonable. Why don't you go on upstairs?"  

"Yes, why don't I?" the jockey said.  

His prim voice had risen higher and there was about it the sharp whine of hysteria.  

"Why don't I go up to my god-damn room and walk around and write some letters and go to bed like a 
good boy? Why don't I just --" He pushed his chair back and got up. "Oh, foo," he said. "Foo to you. I 
want a drink."  

"All I can say is it's your funeral," said Sylvester. "You know what it does to you. You know well 
enough."  

The jockey crossed the dining room and went into the bar. He ordered a Manhattan, and Sylvester 
watched him stand with his heels pressed tight together, his body hard as a lead soldier's, holding his 
little finger out from the cocktail glass and sipping the drink slowly.  

"He's crazy," said Simmons. "Like I said."  

Sylvester turned to the rich man. "If he eats a lamb chop, you can see the shape of it in his stomach a 
hour afterward. He can't sweat things out of him anymore. He's a hundred and twelve and a half. He's 
gained three pounds since we left Miami."  

"A jockey shouldn't drink," said the rich man.  

"The food don't satisfy him like it used to and he can't sweat it out. If he eats a lamb chop, you can 
watch it tooching out in his stomach and it don't go down."  

The jockey finished his Manhattan. He swallowed, crushed the cherry in the bottom of the glass with 
his thumb, then pushed the glass away from him. The two girls in blazers were standing at his left, their 
faces turned toward each other, and at the other end of the bar two touts had started an argument about 
which was the highest mountain in the world. Everyone was with somebody else; there was no other 
person drinking alone that night. The jockey paid with a brand-new fifty-dollar bill and didn't count the 
change.  

He walked back to the dining room and to the table at which the three men were sitting, but he did not 
sit down. "No, I wouldn't presume to think your memory is that extensive," he said. He was so small 
that the edge of the table top reached almost to his belt, and when he gripped the corner with his wiry 
hands he didn't have to stoop. "No, you're too busy gobbling up dinners in dining rooms. You"re too --"  

"Honestly," begged Sylvester. "You got to behave reasonable."  

"Reasonable! Reasonable!" The jockey's gray face quivered, then set in a mean, frozen grin. He shook 
the table so that the plates rattled, and for a moment it seemed that he would push it over. But suddenly 
he stopped. His hand reached out toward the plate nearest to him and deliberately he put a few of the 
French-fried potatoes in his mouth. He chewed slowly, his upper lip raised, then he turned and spat out 
the pulpy mouthful on the smooth red carpet which covered the floor. "Libertines," he said, and his 
voice was thin and broken. He rolled the word in his mouth, as though it had a flavor and a substance 
that gratified him. "You libertines," he said again, and turned and walked with his rigid swagger out of 
the dining room.  

Sylvester shrugged one of his loose, heavy shoulders. The rich man sopped up some water that had been 
spilled on the tablecloth, and they didn't speak until the waiter came to clear away. 

 

 

The Japanese Quince (1910) 

By John Galsworthy 

As Mr. Nilson, well known in the city, opened the window of his dressing room on Campden Hill, he 
experienced a peculiar sweetish sensation in the back of his throat, and a feeling of emptiness just under 
his fifth rib. Hooking the window back, he noticed that a little tree in the Square Gardens had come out in 
blossom, and that the thermometer stood at sixty. “Perfect morning,” he thought; “spring at last!”  

Resuming some meditations on the price of Tintos, he took up an ivory-backed handglass and scrutinised 
his face. His firm, well-coloured cheeks, with their neat brown moustaches, and his round, well-opened, 
clear grey eyes, wore a reassuring appearance of good health. Putting on his black frock coat, he went, 
downstairs.  

In the dining room his morning paper was laid out on the sideboard. Mr. Nilson had scarcely taken it in 
his hand when he again became aware of that queer .feeling. Somewhat concerned, he went to the French 
window and descended the scrolled iron steps into the fresh air. A cuckoo clock struck eight.  

“Half an hour to breakfast,” he thought; “I’ll take a turn in the Gardens.”  

He had them to himself, and proceeded to pace the circular path with his morning paper clasped behind 
him. He had scarcely made two revolutions, however, when it was borne in on him that, instead of going 
away in the fresh air, the feeling had increased. He drew several deep breaths, having heard deep 
breathing recommended by his wife’s doctor; but they augmented rather than diminished the sensation—
as of some sweetish liquor in course within him, together with a faint aching just above his heart. 
Running over what he had eaten the night before, he could recollect no unusual dish, and it occurred to 
him that it might possibly be some smell affecting him. But he could detect nothing except a faint sweet 
lemony scent, rather agreeable than otherwise, which evidently emanated from the bushes budding in the 
sunshine. He was on the point of resuming his promenade, when a blackbird close by burst into song, and, 
looking up, Mr. Nilson saw at a distance of perhaps five yards a little tree, in the heart of whose branches 
the bird was perched. He stood staring curiously at this tree, recognising it for that which he had noticed 
from his window. It was covered with young blossoms, pink and white, and little bright green leaves both 
round and spiky; and on all this blossom and these leaves the sunlight glistened. Mr. Nilson smiled; the 
little tree was so alive and pretty! And instead of passing on, he stayed there smiling at the tree.  

“Morning like this!” he thought; “and here I am the only person in the Square who has the -to come out 
and—!” But he had no sooner conceived this thought than he saw quite near him a man with his hands 
behind him, who was also staring up and smiling at the little tree. Rather taken aback, Mr. Nilson ceased 
to smile, and looked furtively at the stranger. It was his next-door neighbour, Mr. Tandram, well known 
in the City, who had occupied the adjoining house for some five years. Mr. Nilson perceived at once the 
awkwardness of his position, for, being married, they had not yet had occasion to speak to one another. 
Doubtful as to his proper conduct, he decided at last to murmur: “Fine morning!” and was passing on, 
when Mr. Tandram answered: “Beautiful, for the time of year!” Detecting a slight nervousness in his 
neighbour’s voice, Mr. Nilson was emboldened to regard him openly. He was of about Mr. Nilson’s own 
height, with firm well-coloured cheeks, neat brown moustaches, clear grey eyes; and was wearing a frock 
coat. Mr. Nilson noticed that he had his morning paper clasped behind him as he looked up at the little 
tree. And, visited somehow by the feeling that he had been caught out, he said abruptly:  

“Er—can you give me the name of that tree?”  

Mr. Tandram answered: “I was about to ask you that,” and stepped towards it. Mr. Nilson also 
approached the tree.  

“Sure to have its name on, I should think,” he said.  

Mr. Tandram was the first to see the little label, close to where blackbird had been sitting. He read it out.  

“Japanese quince!” 

“Ah!” said Mr. Nilson, “thought so. Early flowerers.” 

“Very,” assented Mr. Tandram, and added: “Quite a feelin’ in the air today.” 

Mr. Nilson nodded.  

“It was a blackbird singin’,” he said.  

“Blackbirds,” answered Mr. Tandram. “I prefer them to thrushes myself; more body in the note.” And he 
looked at Mr. Nilson in an almost friendly way. 

“Quite,” murmured Mr. Nilson. “These exotics, they don’t bear fruit. Pretty blossom!” and he again 
glanced up at the blossom, thinking: “Nice fellow, this, I rather like him.”  

Mr. Tandram also gazed at the blossom. And the little tree, as if appreciating their attention, quivered and 
glowed. From a distance the blackbird gave a loud, clear call. Mr. Nilson dropped his eyes. It struck him 
suddenly that Mr. Tandram looked a little foolish; and, as if he had seen himself, he said: “I must be 
going in. Good morning!”  

A shade passed over Mr. Tandram’s face, as if he, too, had suddenly noticed something about Mr. Nilson.  

“Good morning,” he replied, and clasping their journals to their backs they separated.  

Mr. Nilson retraced his steps towards his garden window, walking slowly so as to avoid arriving at the 
same time as his neighbour. Having seen Mr. Tandram mount his scrolled iron steps, he ascended his own 
in turn. On the top step he paused.  

With the slanting spring sunlight darting and quivering into it, the Japanese quince seemed more living 
than a tree. The blackbird had returned to it, and was chanting out his heart.  

Mr. Nilson sighed; again he felt that queer sensation, that choky feeling in his throat.  

The sound of a cough or sigh attracted his attention. There, in the shadow of his French window, stood 
Mr. Tandram, also looking forth across the Gardens at the little quince tree.  

Unaccountably upset, Mr. Nilson turned abruptly into the house, and opened his morning paper. 

 

