


the [CHARACTER]
the [CHARACTER] rides in the very back of the party in the
general prologue and is fittingly the most marginalized character
in the company. his profession is somewhat dubious--[CHARACTER]s offered indulgences,
or previously written pardons for particular sins, to people who
repented of the sin they had committed. along with receiving the
indulgence, the penitent would make a donation to the church by
giving money to the [CHARACTER]. eventually, this "charitable" donation
became a necessary part of receiving an indulgence. paid by the
church to offer these indulgences, the [CHARACTER] was not supposed
to pocket the penitents' charitable donations. that said, the practice
of offering indulgences came under critique by quite a few churchmen,
since once the charitable donation became a practice allied to receiving
an indulgence, it began to look like one could cleanse oneself of
sin by simply paying off the church. additionally, widespread suspicion
held that [CHARACTER]s counterfeited the pope's signature on illegitimate
indulgences and pocketed the "charitable donations" themselves.
chaucer's [CHARACTER] is a highly untrustworthy character.
he sings a ballad--"com hider, love, to me!" (general prologue, 672)--with
the hypocritical summoner, undermining the already challenged virtue
of his profession as one who works for the church. he presents himself
as someone of ambiguous gender and sexual orientation, further challenging
social norms. the narrator is not sure whether the [CHARACTER] is an
effeminate homosexual or a eunuch (castrated male). like the other
pilgrims, the [CHARACTER] carries with him to canterbury the
tools of his trade--in his case, freshly signed papal indulgences
and a sack of false relics, including a brass cross filled with stones
to make it seem as heavy as gold and a glass jar full of pig's bones, which
he passes off as saints' relics. since visiting relics on pilgrimage had
become a tourist industry, the  [CHARACTER] wants to cash in on religion
in any way he can, and he does this by selling tangible, material objects--whether
slips of paper that promise forgiveness of sins or animal bones
that people can string around their necks as charms against the
devil. after telling the group how he gulls people into indulging
his own avarice through a sermon he preaches on greed, the [CHARACTER]
tells of a tale that exemplifies the vice decried in his sermon. furthermore,
he attempts to sell pardons to the group--in effect plying his trade
in clear violation of the rules outlined by the host.
