johnny got his gun
by dalton trumbo
_____________________________
a bantam book
copyright © 1939, 1959 by dalton trumbo
ebook scanned & proofed by binwiped 11-22-02 [v1.0]
introduction
world war i began like a summer festival—all billowing skirts and golden epaulets.
millions upon millions cheered from the sidewalks while plumed imperial highnesses,
serenities, field marshals and other such fools paraded through the capital cities of europe
at the head of their shining legions.
it was a season of generosity; a time for boasts, bands, poems, songs, innocent
prayers. it was an august made palpitant and breathless by the pre-nuptial nights of
young gentlemen-officers and the girls they left permanently behind them. one of the
highland regiments went over the top in its first battle behind forty kilted bagpipers,
skirling away for all they were worth—at machine guns.
nine million corpses later, when the bands stopped and the serenities started running,
the wail of bagpipes would never again sound quite the same. it was the last of the
romantic wars; and johnny got his gun was probably the last american novel written
about it before an entirely different affair called world war ii got under way.
the book has a weird political history. written in 1938 when pacifism was anathema
to the american left and most of the center, it went to the printers in the spring of 1939
and was published on september third—ten days after the nazi-soviet pact, two days
after the start of world war ii.
shortly thereafter, on the recommendation of mr. joseph wharton lippincott (who
felt it would stimulate sales), serial rights were sold to the daily worker of new york
city. for months thereafter the book was a rally point for the left.
after pearl harbor its subject matter seemed as inappropriate to the times as the
shriek of bagpipes. mr. paul blanshard, speaking of army censorship in the right to
read (1955) says, "a few pro-axis foreign-language magazines had been banned, as well
as three books, including dalton trumbo's pacifist novel johnny get your gun, produced
during the period of the hitler-stalin pact."
since mr. blanshard fell into what i hope was unconscious error both as to the period
of the book's "production" and the title under which it was "produced," i can't place too
much faith in his story of its suppression. certainly i was not informed of it; i received a
number of letters from service men overseas who had read it through army libraries; and,
in 1945, i myself ran across a copy in okinawa while fighting was still in progress.
if, however, it had been banned and i had known about it, i doubt that i should have
protested very loudly. there are times when it may be needful for certain private rights to
give way to the requirements of a larger public good. i know that's a dangerous thought,
and i shouldn't wish to carry it too far, but world war ii was not a romantic war.
as the conflict deepened, and johnny went out of print altogether, its unavailability
became a civil liberties issue with the extreme american right. peace organizations and
"mothers'" groups from all over the country showered me with fiercely sympathetic
letters denouncing jews, communists, new dealers and international bankers, who had
suppressed my novel to intimidate millions of true americans who demanded an
immediate negotiated peace.
my correspondents, a number of whom used elegant stationery and sported tidewater
addresses, maintained a network of communications that extended to the detention camps
of pro-nazi internees. they pushed the price of the book above six dollars for a used
copy, which displeased me for a number of reasons, one of them fiscal. they proposed a
national rally for peace-now, with me as cheer leader; they promised (and delivered) a
letter campaign to pressure the publisher for a fresh edition.
nothing could have convinced me so quickly that johnny was exactly the sort of
book that shouldn't be reprinted until the war was at an end. the publishers agreed. at the
insistence of friends who felt my correspondents' efforts could adversely affect the war
effort, i foolishly reported their activities to the f. b. i. but when a beautifully matched
pair of investigators arrived at my house, their interest lay not in the letters but in me. i
have the feeling that it still does, and it serves me right.
after 1945, those two or three new editions which appeared found favor with the
general left, and apparently were completely ignored by everybody else, including all
those passionate war-time mothers. it was out of print again during the korean war, at
which time i purchased the plates rather than have them sold to the government for
conversion into munitions. and there the story ends, or begins.
reading it once more after so many years, i've had to resist a nervous itch to touch it
up here, to change it there, to clarify, correct, elaborate, cut. after all, the book is twenty
years younger than i, and i have changed so much, and it hasn't. or has it?
is it possible for anything to resist change, even a mere commodity that can be
bought, buried, banned, damned, praised, or ignored for all the wrong reasons? probably
not. johnny held a different meaning for three different wars. its present meaning is what
each reader conceives it to be, and each reader is gloriously different from every other
reader, and each is also changing.
i've let it remain as it was to see what it is.
dalton trumbo
los angeles march 25, 1959
book i
the dead
chapter 1
he wished the phone would stop ringing. it was bad enough to be sick let alone having a
phone ring all night long. boy was he sick. not from any of their sour french wine either.
a man couldn't hold enough of it to get a head this big. his stomach was going round and
round and round. fine thing nobody'd answer that phone. it sounded like it was ringing in
a room about a million miles wide. his head was a million miles wide too. the hell with
the telephone.
that damn bell must be at the other end of the world. he would have to walk for a
couple years to get to it. ring ring ring all night long. maybe somebody wanted
something bad. telephones ringing at night are important. you'd think they'd pay
attention to it. how could they expect him to answer it anyhow? he was tired and his
head was plenty big. you could stick a whole phone in his ear and he couldn't evea feel it.
he must have been drinking dynamite.
why didn't somebody answer that goddam telephone?
"hey joe. front and center."
here he was sick as hell and like a damned fool making his way through the night
shipping room toward the telephone. it was so noisy you wouldn't think anybody could
hear a tiny sound like a phone ringing. yet he had. he'd heard it above the click-clickclick
of the battle creek wrappers and the rattle of the belt conveyors and the howl of the
rotary ovens upstairs and the rumble of steel route bins being hauled into place and the
sputter of motors in the garage being tuned up against the morning's work and the scream
of dollies that needed oil why the hell didn't somebody oil them?
he walked down the middle aisle between the steel bins that were being filled with
bread. he threaded his way through the floor litter of dollies and boxes and rumpled
cartons and crippled loaves. the boys looked at him as he went. he remembered their
faces floating by him as he moved toward the telephone. dutch and little dutch and
whitey who took shots in his spine and pablo and rudy and all the boys. they looked at
him curiously as he passed them. maybe that was because he was scared inside and
showed it outside. he got to the phone.
"hello."
"hello son. come on home now."
"all right mother i'll be right there."
he went into the lean-to office with the wide glass front where jody simmons the
night foreman kept a close watch on his crew.
"jody i got to go home. my father just died."
"died? gosh kid that's too bad. sure kid you run along. rudy. hey rudy. grab a
truck and drive joe home. his old —his father just died. sure kid go on home. i'll have
one of the boys punch you out. that's tough kid. go home."
rudy stepped on it. it was raining outside because it was december and los angeles
just before christmas. the tires sizzled against the wet pavement as they went. it was the
quietest night he had ever heard except for the tires sizzling and the clatter of the ford
echoing between deserted buildings in an empty street. rudy sure stepped on it. there
was a rattle somewhere back of them in the truck body that kept the same time no matter
how fast they went. rudy didn't say anything. he just drove. way out figueroa past big
old houses and then smaller houses and then on out some more to the south end. rudy
stopped the car.
"thanks rudy, i'll let you know when everything's finished. i'll be back to work in a
couple days."
"sure joe. that's all right. it's tough. i'm sorry goodnight."
the ford grabbed for traction. then its motor roared and it went sideslipping down
the street. water bubbled along the curb. the rain pattered down steadily. he stood there
for a moment to take a good breath and then he started for the place.
the place was on the alley above a garage behind a two story house. to get to it he
walked down a narrow driveway which was between two houses close together. it was
black between the houses. rain from the two roofs met there and spattered down into
wide puddles with a queer wet echo like water being poured into a cistern. his feet
squshed in the water as he went.
when he got out from between the two houses he saw lights on over the garage. he
opened the door. a rush of hot air swept over him. it was hot air perfumed with the soap
and scented rubbing alcohol they used for bathing his father and with the powder they put
on him afterward to fight off bedsores. everything was very quiet. he tip-toed upstairs
his wet shoes still squshing a little.
in the living room his father lay dead with a sheet pulled over his face. he had been
sick a long while and they had kept him in the living room because the glassed-in porch
which was the bedroom for his father and mother and sisters was too drafty.
he walked over to his mother and touched her shoulder. she wasn't crying very hard.
"did you call someone?"
"yes they'll be here anytime. i wanted you to be here first."
his younger sister was still asleep on the glassed-in porch but his older sister only
thirteen was crumpled in a corner in her bathrobe catching her breath and sobbing quietly.
he looked over at her. she was crying like a woman. he hadn't realized before that she
was practically grown up. she had been growing up all the time and he hadn't noticed till
now when she was crying because her father was dead.
a knock came on the door downstairs.
"it's them. let's go into the kitchen. it'll be better."
they had a little trouble getting his sister into the kitchen but she came quietly
enough. it seemed she couldn't walk. her face was blank. her eyes were big and she was
gasping more than crying. his mother sat on a stool in the kitchen and took his sister into
her arms. then he went to the head of the stairs and called down quietly.
"come in."
two men in gleaming clean collars opened the door down there and started up the
stairs. they carried a long wicker basket. quickly he stepped into the living room and
pulled aside the sheets to have a look at his father before they reached the top of the
stairs.
he looked down at a tired face that was only fifty-one years old. he looked down
and thought dad i feel lots older than you. i was sorry for you dad. things weren't going
well and they never would have gone well for you and it's just as good you're dead.
people've got to be quicker and harder these days than you were dad. goodnight and
good-dreams. i won't forget you and i'm not as sorry for you today as i was yesterday. i
loved you dad goodnight.
they came into the room. he turned and walked into the kitchen to his mother and
sister. the other sister who was only seven still slept.
there were sounds from the front room. the men's footsteps as they tip-toed around
the bed. a faint woosh of covers being thrown toward the foot. then a sound of bedsprings
relaxing after eight months' use. then a sound of wicker squeaking as it took up
the burden the bed had left off with. then after a heavy squeaking from all parts of the
basket a shuffling of feet moving out of the front room and down the stairs. he wondered
if they were carrying the basket evenly down the stairs or if the head was lower than the
feet or if it was in any way uncomfortable. his father performing the same task would
have carried the basket very gently.
when the door at the foot of the stairs closed behind them his mother began to shake
a little. her voice came like dry air.
"that's not bill. it may seem like it but it's not."
he patted his mother's shoulder. his sister relaxed down on the floor again.
that was all.
well why couldn't it be all then? how many times was he going to have to go
through it? it was all over and finished and why couldn't the goddam phone ever stop
ringing? he was nutty because he had a hangover a big hangover and he was having bad
dreams. pretty soon if he had to he'd wake up and answer the phone but somebody should
do it for him if they had any consideration at all because he was tired and sick of it.
things were getting floaty and sickly. things were so quiet. things were so goddam
still. a hangover headache thumps and clatters and raises hell inside your skull. but this
wasn't any hangover. he was a sick man. he was a sick man and he was remembering
things. like coming out of ether. but you'd think the telephone would stop ringing
sometime. it couldn't just go on forever. he couldn't go over and over the same business
of answering it and hearing his father was dead and then going home through a rainy
night. he'd catch cold if he did that much more. besides his father could only die once.
the telephone bell was just part of a dream. it had sounded different from any other
telephone bell or any other sound because it had meant death. after all that bell was a
particular kind of thing a very particular kind of thing as old prof eldridge used to say in
senior english. and a particular kind of thing sticks with you but there's no use of it
sticking too close. that bell and its message and everything about it was way back in time
and he was finished with it.
the bell was ringing again. way far off as if echoing through a lot of shutters in his
mind he could hear it. he felt as if he were tied down and couldn't answer it yet he felt as
if he had to answer it. the bell sounded as lonesome as christ ringing out in the bottom
of his mind waiting for an answer. and they couldn't make connections. with each ring it
seemed to get lonesomer. with each ring he got more scared.
he drifted again. he was hurt. he was bad hurt. the bell was fading. he was
dreaming. he wasn't dreaming. he was awake even though he couldn't see. he was
awake even though he couldn't hear a thing except a telephone that really wasn't ringing.
he was mighty scared.
he remembered how when he was a kid he read the last days of pompeii and
awakened in the middle of a dark night crying in terror with his face suffocating in the
pillow and thinking that the top of one of his colorado mountains had blown off and that
the covers were lava and that he was entombed while yet alive and that he would lie there
dying forever. he had that same gasping feeling now. he had that same cowardly griping
in his bowels. he was unchristly scared so he gathered his strength and made like a man
buried in loose earth clawing out with his hands toward air.
then he sickened and choked and fainted half away and was dragged back by pain. it
was all over his body like electricity. it seemed to shake him hard and then throw him
back against the bed exhausted and completely quiet. he lay there feeling the sweat pour
out of his skin. then he felt something else. he felt hot damp skin all over him and the
dampness enabled him to feel his bandages. he was wrapped in them from top to bottom.
even his head.
he really was hurt then.
the shock caused his heart to smash against his ribs. he grew prickly all over. his
heart was pounding away in his chest but he couldn't hear the pulse in his ear.
oh god then he was deaf. where did they get that stuff about bombproof dugouts
when a man in one of them could be hit so hard that the whole complicated business of
his ears could be blown away leaving him deaf so deaf he couldn't hear his own heart
beat? he had been hit and he had been hit bad and now he was deaf. not just a little deaf.
not just halfway deaf. he was stone deaf.
he lay there for a while with the pain ebbing and thinking this will give me
something to chew on all right all right. what about the rest of the guys? maybe they
didn't come out so lucky. there were some good boys down in that hole. how'll it seem
being deaf and shouting at people? you write things on paper. no that's wrong they write
things on paper to you. it isn't anything to kick up your heels and dance about but it might
be worse. only when you're deaf you're lonesome. you're godforsaken.
so he'd never hear again. well there were a hell of a lot of things he didn't want to
hear again. he never wanted to hear the biting little castanet sound of a machine gun or
the high whistle of a .75 coming down fast or the slow thunder as it hit or the whine of an
airplane overhead or the yells of a guy trying to explain to somebody that he's got a bullet
in his belly and that his breakfast is coming out through the front of him and why won't
somebody stop going forward and give him a hand only nobody can hear him they're so
scared themselves. the hell with it.
things were going in and out of focus. it was like looking into one of those
magnified shaving mirrors and then moving it toward you and away from you. he was
sick and probably out of his head and he was badly hurt and he was lonesome deaf but he
was also alive and he could still hear far away and sharp the sound of a telephone bell.
he was sinking and rising and then going in lazy quiet black circles. everything was
alive with sound. he was nuts all right. he caught a glimpse of the big ditch where he and
the guys used to go swimming in colorado before he came to los angeles before he
came to the bakery. he could hear the splash of water as art did one of his high dives he's
a fool for diving so far why can't the rest of us do it? he looked out across the rolling
meadows of grand mesa eleven thousand feet in the sky and saw acres of columbines
stirring in a cool august breeze and heard far off the roar of mountain streams. he saw
his father pulling a sled with his mother on it one christmas morning. he heard the fresh
snow squealing under the runners of the sled. the sled was his christmas present and his
mother was laughing like a girl and his dad was grinning in his slow wrinkly way.
they seemed to have a good time his mother and his father. especially then. they
used to flirt with each other right in front of him before the girls were born. do you remember
this? do you remember that? i cried. you talked like this. you wore your hair so.
you picked me up and i remembered how strong you were and you put me on old
frank because he was gentle and after that we rode across the river on the ice with
old frank picking his way carefully like a dog.
you remember the telephone when you were courting me? i remember everything
when i was courting you even the gander that used to rush and hiss at me when i took
you in my arms. you remember the telephone when you were courting me silly? i
remember. then you remember the party line going eighteen miles along cole creek
valley and only five customers? i remember i remember the way you looked with your
big eyes and your smooth forehead you haven't changed. you remember the telephone
line and how new it was? oh it was lonely out there with nobody in three or four miles
and nobody really in the world but you. and me waiting for the telephone to ring. it rang
two times for us remember? two rings and you were calling from the grocery store when
the store was closed. and the receivers all along the line all five of them going click-click
bill is calling macia click-click-click. and then your voice how funny it was to hear your
voice the first time over a telephone how wonderful it always was.
"hello macia."
"hello bill how are you?"
"i'm fine are you through with the work?"
"we just finished the dishes."
"i suppose everybody is listening again tonight."
"i suppose."
"don't they know i love you? you'd think that was enough for them."
"maybe it isn't."
"macia why don't you play a piece on the piano?"
"all right bill. which one?"
"whatever one you like i like them all."
"all right bill. wait till i fix the receiver."
and then way out on cole creek way west on the other side of the mountains from
denver music tinkling over telephone wires that were brand new and wonderful. his
mother before she was his mother before she thought particularly of becoming his mother
would go over to the piano the only one on cole creek and play the beautiful blue ohio
or perhaps my pretty red wing. she would play it clear through and his father in shale
city would be listening and thinking isn't it wonderful i can sit here eight miles away and
hold a little piece of black business to my ear and hear far off the music of macia my
beautiful my macia.
"could you hear it bill?"
"yes. it was lovely."
then somebody else maybe six miles up or down the line would break into the
conversation without being ashamed at all.
"macia i just picked up the hook and heard you playing. why don't you play after
the ball is over? clem'd like to hear it if you don't mind."
his mother would go back to the piano and play after the ball is over and clem
somewhere would be listening to music for maybe the first time in three or four months.
farmers' wives would be sitting with their work done and receivers to their ears listening
too and getting dreamy and thinking about things their husbands wouldn't suspect. and so
it went with everybody up and down the lonesome bed of cole creek asking his mother
to play a favorite piece and his father listening from shale city and liking it but perhaps
growing a little impatient occasionally and saying to himself i wish the people out on
cole creek would understand that this is a courtship not a concert.
sounds sounds sounds everywhere with the bell fading out and returning and him so
sick and deaf he wanted to die. he was wallowing in blackness and far away the telephone
bell was ringing with nobody there to answer it. a piano was tinkling far far away
and he knew his mother was playing it for his dead father before his father was dead and
before she had any thought of him her son. the piano kept time with the bell and the bell
with the piano and in back of it there was thick silence and a yearning to listen and lonesomeness.
now the moon shines tonight on pretty red wing the birds are sighing, the night
wind crying . . .
chapter 2
his mother was singing in the kitchen. he could hear her singing there and the sound of
her voice was the sound of home. she sang the same tune over and over again. she never
sang the words to it just the tune in a kind of absent voice as if she were thinking of
something else and the singing were only a way of killing time. when she was busiest
she always sang.
it was the fall of the year. the poplars and cottonwoods had turned red and yellow.
his mother was working and singing in the kitchen over the old coal-burning stove. she
was stirring apple butter in a big crock. or she was canning peaches. the peaches sent a
rich spicy smell through the whole house. she was making jelly. the pulp from the fruit
hung in a flour sack over the cooler part of the stove. through the cloth the juices oozed
stickily down into a pan. the pan had a thick pinkish-cream scum around its edges. in the
center the juice was clear and red.
she was baking bread. she baked bread twice a week. she kept a jar of starter in the
ice box from baking time to baking time so she never had to worry about yeast. the bread
was heavy and brown and sometimes it swelled two or three inches over the top of the
pan. when she took it out of the oven she smeared the brown crust with butter and let it
cool. but even better than the bread were the rolls. she baked them to come out of the
oven just before supper. they were steaming hot and you put butter inside them and it
melted and then you put jam on them or apricot preserves with nuts in the syrup. that
was all you wanted for supper although you had to eat other things of course. on summer
afternoons you took a thick slice of the bread and put cold butter on it. then you
sprinkled sugar over the butter and that was better than cake. or you got a thick slice of
sweet bermuda onion and put it between two slabs of bread and butter and nobody
anywhere in the world had anything more delicious to eat.
in the fall his mother worked from day to day and from week to week scarcely ever
getting out of the kitchen. she canned peaches and cherries and raspberries and black berries
and plums and apricots and made jams and jellies and preserves and chili sauces. and
while she worked she sang. she sang the same hymn in an absent voice without words as
if she were thinking of something else all the while.
there was a hamburger man down on fifth and main. he was slight and stooped and
pasty-faced and always glad to talk with anyone who stopped by his stand. he was the
only hamburger man in shale city so he had a monopoly on the business. people said he
was a dope fiend and that sometime he would get dangerous. but he never did and he
made the best hamburgers anyone ever ate. he had a gas flare over his gas plate and you
could smell the wonderful odor of onions frying there for a block on either side of his
stand. he came out about five or six in the afternoons and made hamburgers until ten or
eleven. you had to wait if you wanted a sandwich.
his mother loved the hamburger man's sandwiches. on saturday nights his father
worked late at the store. he would go down town on saturday nights and wait until his
father got his pay check. at about a quarter to ten when the store was getting ready to
close his father would give him thirty cents for three hamburgers. he would rush with his
money over to the hamburger man to get a place in line. he would order three
hamburgers to go with lots of onions and sweet mustard. by the time the order was filled
his father would already be on the way home. the hamburger man would put the
sandwiches in a bag and he would put the bag inside his shirt next to his body. then he
would run all the way home so that the hamburgers would still be warm. he would run
through the sharp autumn nights feeling the heat of the hamburgers next to his stomach.
each saturday night he tried to beat last saturday's time so the sandwiches would be even
warmer. he would get home and pull them out of his shirt front and his mother would eat
one right away. by that time his father would be home too. it was a great saturday night
feast. the girls would be in bed being so young and it seemed to him that he had his
father and mother completely to himself. he was in a way grown up. he envied the
hamburger man because the hamburger man could have all the sandwiches he wanted.
in the fall the snow came. usually there was snow for thanksgiving but sometimes it
didn't come until middle december. the first snowfall was the most wonderful thing on
earth. his father always waked him early his voice booming out about the snow. it was
usually a wet snow and it clung to everything it touched. even the wire fence around the
chicken coop in the backyard would hold the snow maybe a half inch deep. the chickens
never stopped being puzzled and alarmed about the first snow. they would walk carefully
in it and shake their feet and the roosters would talk about it complainingly all day long.
the outbuildings were always beautiful and a fence post would have a cap four inches
high. the birds in vacant lots would make little patterns in the snow crossed up once in a
while by a rabbit track. his father never failed to wake him early when the snow fell.
first he rushed to the window to look. then he got into his heavy clothes and his
mackinaw and his boots and his sheepskin gloves and took his flexible flyer and went out
with the rest of the kids and didn't come back till his feet were numb and his nose was
frosty. the snow was a wonderful thing.
in the spring there were primroses ail over the vacant lots. they opened in the
morning and closed when the sun grew hot and then opened again in the evening. each
evening the kids went on primrose hunts. they brought back great bouquets of white
flowers as big as your hand and put them in flat bowls of water. on may day they made
baskets and filled them with primroses hiding a little candy beneath the flowers. when it
was dark they went from house to house and left a basket and knocked on the door and
ran away fast into the night.
lincoln beechy came to town. it was the first airplane shale city ever saw. they had
it in a tent in the middle of the race track over in the fair grounds. day in and day out
people filed through the tent looking at it. it seemed to be all wire and cloth. people
couldn't understand how a man would risk his life just on the strength of a wire. one little
wire gone wrong and it meant the end of lincoln beechy. away up in front of the plane
ahead of the propellers was a little seat with a stick in front of it. that was where the
great aviator sat.
everyone in shale city was pleased with the idea of lincoln beechy coming to
town. it was a wonderful thing. shale city was really becoming a metropolis. lincoln
beechy didn't stop at every little stick-in-the-mud town. he stopped only in places like
denver and shale city and salt lake and he was going on to san francisco. the whole
town turned out the day lincoln beechy looped the loop. he did it five times. it was the
damnedest thing anybody ever saw.
mr. hargraves who was superintendent of schools made a speech before the flight.
he told about how the invention of the airplane was the greatest step forward man had
made in a hundred years. the airplane said mr. hargraves would cut down the distance
between nations and peoples. the airplane would be a great instrument in making people
understand one another in making people love one another. the airplane said mr.
hargraves was ushering in a new era of peace and prosperity and mutual understanding.
everyone would be friends said mr. hargraves when the airplane knitted the world
together so that the people of the world understood each other.
after the speech lincoln beechy looped the loop five times and left town. a couple
months later his airplane fell into san francisco bay and lincoln beechy was drowned.
shale city felt as if it had lost a resident. the shale city monitor ran an editorial. it said
that even though the great lincoln beechy was dead the airplane the instrument of peace
the knitter together of peoples would go on.
his birthday fell in december. each birthday his mother cooked a big dinner and he
had his friends over to the house. each of his friends also had birthday dinners so there
were at least six big affairs during the year for the guys to get together. they usually had
chicken and there was always a birthday cake and ice cream. the guys all brought presents.
he would never forget the time glen hogan brought him a pair of brown silk socks.
that was before he had long trousers. the socks seemed to mean a step forward into a
grownup future. they were very handsome. after the party he put them on and stared at
them for a long while. he got the long pants to go with them three months later.
the guys all liked his father probably because his father liked the guys. after the
dinner was over his father always took them all to a show. they would put on their
mackinaws and go outside into the snow and tramp down to the elysium theatre. it was
great feeling warm on the inside from food and your face cold on the outside from zero
air and a show to look forward to. he could hear their footsteps squeaking in the snow
even now. he could see his father leading the pack down to the elysium. he remembered
that the shows were always good.
in the fall there was the county fair. there were bucking bronchos and steers to be
bulldogged and bareback indian races and trotting races. there was always a bunch of indians
headed by the great squaw chipeta. a street in shale city was named after her. the
town of ouray colorado had been named after chief ouray her husband. the indians
chipeta brought with her didn't do much but squat around and stare but chipeta herself
was full of smiles and talk about the early days.
a carnival came to town during the fair and you could see women cut in half and
motorcycle riders defying death inside a straight up and down circular wall. in the main
auditorium of the fair grounds there were canned fruits gleaming through mason jars and
displays of embroidery and rows of cakes and piles of bread and huge squashes and
extra-fancy potatoes. in the livestock pens there were steers that looked as square as an
outhouse and pigs almost as big as cows and thoroughbred chickens. fair week was the
biggest week of the year. in a way it was even bigger than christmas. you bought whips
with tassels on the ends and it was a mark of favor if you flicked the legs of a girl you
liked. there was a smell about the fair grounds you never forgot. a smell you never
ceased dreaming of. he would always smell it somewhere back in his mind as long as he
lived.
in the summer they went out to the big ditch north of town and stripped off their
clothes and lay around on its banks and talked. the water would be warm from the summer
air and heat would be rising off the brown-gray land like steam. they would swim
for a little while then they would go back on the bank and sit around all naked and tan
and talk. they would talk about bicycles and girls and dogs and guns. they would talk
about camping trips and rabbit hunting and girls and fishing. they would talk about the
hunting knives they all wanted but only glen hogan had. they would talk about girls.
when they came of an age to take girls out on dates they always took them to the
pavilion in the fair grounds. they began to get very dressy. they talked about ties with
matching handkerchiefs and they wore brogue shoes and shirts that had bright red and
green and yellow stripes in them. glen hogan had seven silk shirts. he had most of the
girls too. it got to be an important matter whether or not you had a car and it was a very
humiliating thing to walk your girl to the pavilion.
sometimes you didn't have enough money to go to the dance so you would drive
lazily by the fair grounds and hear the music coming through the night from the pavilion.
the songs all had meaning and the words were very serious. you felt all swelled up inside
and you wished you were over there at the pavilion. you wondered who your girl was
dancing with. then you would light a cigarette and talk about something else. it was quite
a thing to light a cigarette. you only did it at night when nobody would see you. you
made a serious business of holding the cigarette in a properly careless fashion. and the
first guy in the bunch able to inhale was the greatest guy on earth until the rest caught up
with him.
down at jim o'connell's cigar store the old men sat around and talked about the war.
o'connell's was very cool in the back room. before colorado went dry it was a saloon
and it still had the smell of beer in the floorboards on damp days. the old men sat there
on high chairs and watched the pool tables and spat into big brass spitoons and talked
about england and france and in the end about rooshia. rooshia was always on the point
of starting a big offensive that would push the goddam germans right back on berlin.
that would be the end of your war.
then his father decided to leave shale city. they went to los angeles. there he
became conscious for the first time about the war. he waked to the war when roumania
entered. it seemed very important. he had never heard of roumania except in geography
classes. but the entry of roumania into the war occurred on the same day the los angeles
newspapers carried a story of two young canadian soldiers who had been crucified
by the germans in full view of their comrades across nomansland. that made the
germans nothing better than animals and naturally you got interested and wanted
germany to get the tar kicked out of her. everybody talked about the oil wells and the
wheat fields of roumania and how they would supply the allies and how this surely was
the end of the war. but the germans walked right through roumania and they took
bucharest and queen marie had to leave her palace. then his father died and america
entered the war and he had to come too and here he was.
he lay and thought oh joe joe this is no place for you. this was no war for you. this
thing wasn't any of your business. what do you care about making the world safe for
democracy? all you wanted to do joe was to live. you were born and raised in the good
healthy country of colorado and you had no more to do with germany or england or
france or even with washington d.c. than you had to do with the man in the moon. yet
here you are and it was none of your affair. here you are joe and you're hurt worse than
you think. you're hurt bad. maybe it would be a lot better if you were dead and buried on
the hill across the river from shale city. maybe there are more things wrong with you
than you suspect joe. oh why the hell did you ever get into this mess anyhow? because it
wasn't your fight joe. you never really knew what the fight was all about.
chapter 3
he shot up through cool waters wondering whether he'd ever make the surface or not.
that was a lot of guff about people sinking three times and then drowning. he'd been
rising and sinking for days weeks months who could tell? but he hadn't drowned. as he
came to the surface each time he fainted into reality and as he went down again he fainted
into nothingness. long slow faints all of them while he struggled for air and life. he was
fighting too hard and he knew it. a man can't fight always. if he's drowning or suffocating
he's got to be smart and hold back some of his strength for the last the final the
death struggle.
he lay back quietly because he was no fool. if you lie back you can float. he used to
float a lot when he was a kid. he knew how to do it. his last strength going into that fight
when all he had to do was float. what a fool.
they were working on him. it took him a little while to understand this because he
couldn't hear them. then he remembered that he was deaf. it was funny to lie there and
have people in the room who were touching you watching you doctoring you and yet not
within hearing distance. the bandages were still all over his head so he couldn't see them
either. he only knew that way out there in the darkness beyond the reach of his ears
people were working over him and trying to help him.
they were taking part of his bandages off. he could feel the coolness the sudden
drying of sweat on his left side. they were working on his arm. he felt the pinch of a
sharp little instrument grabbing something and getting a bit of his skin with each grab. he
didn't jump. he simply lay there because he had to save his strength. he tried to figure
out why they were pinching him. after each pinch there was a little pull in the flesh of his
upper arm and an unpleasant point of heat like friction. the pulling kept on in short little
jerks with his skin getting hot each time. it hurt. he wished they'd stop. it itched. he
wished they'd scratch him.
he froze all over stiff and rigid like a dead cat. there was something wrong about
this pricking and pulling and friction heat. he could feel the things they were doing to his
arm and yet he couldn't rightly feel his arm at all. it was like he felt inside his arm. it was
like he felt through the end of his arm. the nearest thing he could think of to the end of
his arm was the heel of his hand. but the heel of his hand the end of his arm was high
high high as his shoulder.
oh jesus christ they'd cut his left arm off.
they'd cut it right off at the shoulder he could feel it plain now.
oh my god why did they do a thing like that to him?
they couldn't do it the dirty bastards they couldn't do it. they had to have a paper
signed or something. it was the law. you can't just go out and cut a man's arm off without
asking him without getting permission because a man's arm is his own and he needs it.
oh jesus i have to work with that arm why did you cut it off? why did you cut my arm
off answer me why did you cut my arm off? why did you why did you why did you?
he went down into the water again and fought and fought and then came up with his
belly jumping and his throat aching. and all the time that he was under the water fighting
with only one arm to get back he was having conversation with himself about how this
thing couldn't possibly happen to him only it had.
so they cut my arm off. how am i going to work now? they don't think of that. they
don't think of anything but doing it their own way. just another guy with a hole in his arm
let's cut it off what do you say boys? sure cut the guy's arm off. it takes a lot of work and
a lot of money to fix up a guy's arm. this is a war and war is hell and what the hell and so
to hell with it. come on boys watch this. pretty slick hey? he's down in bed and can't say
anything and it's his tough luck and we're tired and this is a stinking war anyhow so let's
cut the damn thing off and be done with it.
my arm. my arm they've cut my arm off. see that stump there? that used to be my
arm. oh sure i had an arm i was born with one i was normal just like you and i could
hear and i had a left arm like anybody. but what do you think of those lazy bastards
cutting it off?
how's that?
i can't hear either. i can't hear. write it down. put it on a piece of paper. i can read all
right. but i can't hear. put it down on a piece of paper and hand the paper to my right arm
because i have no left arm.
my left arm. i wonder what they've done with it. when you cut a man's arm off you
have to do something with it. you can't just leave it lying around. do you send it to hospitals
so guys can pick it to pieces and see how an arm works? do you wrap it up in an
old newspaper and throw it onto the junk heap? do you bury it? after all it's part of a
man a very important part of a man and it should be treated respectfully. do you take it
out and bury it and say a little prayer? you should because it's human flesh and it died
young and it deserves a good sendoff.
my ring.
there was a ring on my hand. what have you done with it? kareen gave it to me and
i want it back. i can wear it on the other hand. i've got to have it because it means something
it's important. if you've stolen it i'll turn you in as soon as i get these bandages off
you thieving bastards you. if you've stolen it you're grave robbers because my arm that is
gone is dead and you've taken the ring from it and you've robbed the dead that's what
you've done. where is my ring kareen's ring before i go under again? i want the ring.
you've got the arm isn't that enough where's my ring kareen's ring our ring please where
is it? the hand it was on is dead and it wasn't meant to be on rotten flesh. it was meant
always to be on my living finger on my living hand because it meant life.
"my mother gave it to me. it's a real moonstone. you can wear it."
"it won't fit."
"the little finger silly try the little finger."
"oh."
"see i said it would fit."
"little mick."
"oh joe i'm so scared kiss me again."
"we shouldn't've turned the lights out. your old man'll be sore."
"kiss me. mike won't care he understands."
"little mick little mick little mick."
"don't go please don't go joe."
"when you're drafted you got to go."
"they'll kill you."
"maybe. i don't think so."
"lots of people get killed who don't think so don't go joe."
"lots of people come back."
"i love you joe."
"little mick."
"i'm not mick i'm bohunk."
"you're half and half but you look mick. you've got eyes and hair like a little mick."
"oh joe."
"don't cry kareen please don't cry."
suddenly a shadow fell across them and they both looked up.
"stop that stop it goddam you."
old mike birkman how did he get into the house so quietly was standing above them
in the darkness glaring down.
they both lay there on the sofa and stared up at him. he looked like an overgrown
dwarf because his back was crooked from twenty-eight years in the coal mines of
wyoming. twenty-eight years in the mines with an i.w.w. red card and damning
everybody. he stood and glared down at them and they made no move.
"i'll have none of this business going on in my house. you think this is the back seat
of a flivver? now get up like a couple decent people. go on. get up from there k'reen."
kareen got up. she was only five feet one. mike swore it was because she didn't
have enough food when she was a kid but that probably wasn't the truth because her
mother had been small and kareen was perfectly formed and healthy and beautiful so
beautiful. mike was liable to exaggerate when he got excited. kareen looked up at old
mike unafraid.
"he's going away in the morning."
"i know. i know girl. get into the bedroom. both of you. maybe you never get
another chance. go on k'reen."
kareen took one long look at him and then with her head bent as if she were a very
busy child thinking about something walked into the bedroom.
"go on in there boy. she's scared. go in and put your arm around her."
he started to go and then he felt mike's grip against his shoulder. mike was looking
straight into his face and even in the dark his eyes could be seen.
"you know how to treat her don't you. she's no whore. you know don't you?"
"yes."
"go to bed boy."
he turned and went into the bedroom.
an electric candle was burning on one side of the bureau. in the corner of the room
beyond the candle kareen was standing. her waist was off lying on a chair beside her.
she was wearing a slip. as he came in she was twisted around and down a little toward
her hip where her hands were trying to undo the fastening of her skirt. she looked up and
saw him and just looked without moving her hands or anything. she looked at him like
she was seeing him for the first time and didn't know whether to like him or not. she
looked at him in a way that made him want to cry.
he walked over and put his arms around her carefully. she leaned to him with her
forehead against his chest. then she turned away and went over to the bed. she pulled the
covers down and climbed in clothes and all. she kept her eyes on him all the time as if
she was afraid he might say a sharp word or laugh or go away. she made quiet movements
under the covers and then her clothes began to drop over the side of the bed from
between the covers. when they were all on the floor beside the bed she smiled at him.
he started slowly to take off his shirt not moving his eyes from her. she looked
around the room and frowned.
"joe turn your back."
"why?"
"i want to get out of bed."
"why?"
"there's something i forgot. turn your back."
"no."
"please."
"no. i'll get it for you."
"i want to get it myself. turn your back."
"no. i want to see you."
"you can't joe get my robe."
"all right. i'll do that."
"in the closet. it's red."
he went to the closet and got her robe. it was a thin little thing with flowers printed
on it and not enough to cover anybody really. he took it over to the bed holding it a little
distance from her.
"bring it closer."
"reach for it."
she laughed and then reached out quick and snatched it from him back under the
covers. she had to reach so far that he saw the curve of her breast. she laughed softly all
the while she struggled under the covers putting the robe on and pulling it down as if she
had played a great joke on him. then she threw the covers back and jumped out of bed
and ran in her bare feet into the living room. he saw the bottoms of her feet as they
whisked to the floor. they had two arches one through the instep and another that crossed
it rising delicately in the ball of her foot and fading away toward the heel. he thought
how beautiful her feet are how strong and beautiful they are.
she came back with a bowl filled with red geraniums. she took them over to a little
table that stood in front of the window.
she opened the window and then turned slowly around to face him. she was leaning
against the little table and kind of hanging onto it with her hands at the same time.
"if you really want to see me"
"but if you don't want me to i don't want to."
she walked over to the closet and turned her back and slipped off the robe. then she
turned around watching her feet all the time and went over to the bed and slipped in between
the covers.
he turned out the light and took off his clothes and got into bed beside her. he threw
his arm around her a little carelessly as if it were all an accident. she lay very quietly. he
moved his leg. a little puff of air came up from between the covers and he could smell
her. clean clean flesh and the smell of soap and sheets. he put his leg next to hers. she
whirled to him and threw both of her arms around his neck and held him tight.
"oh joe joe i don't want you to go."
"you think i want to go?"
"i'm afraid."
"of me?'
"oh no."
"little mick."
"it's nice like this isn't it?"
"ummm."
"were you ever like this with anyone before?"
"not with anyone i loved."
"i'm glad."
"it's the truth. you?"
"you shouldn't ask that."
"why?"
"because i'm a lady."
"you're a little mick."
"i never was."
"i know."
"but you couldn't've known really oh joe i wish you'd run away and not go."
"there. my left arm under you. like a cushion."
"kiss me."
"sweet little mick."
"darling. oh darling. oh. oh my dear my dear my dear my"
they didn't sleep very much. sometimes they dozed off and awakened and found
that they were apart and came back to each other and held one another tight very tight as
if they had been lost forever and had just found each other all over again. and all night
long mike was stirring through the house and coughing and mumbling.
when morning came he stood over their bed holding a breadboard which had two
breakfasts on it.
"here you kids eat."
tough old mike standing there gentle and grizzled and fierce with bloodshot painful
eyes. mike had been in jail too many times not to be good. old mike who hated everybody.
he hated wilson and he hated hughes and he hated roosevelt and he hated the
socialists because they had only big talk and milk in their veins for blood. he even hated
debs a little although not much. twenty-eight years in the coal mine had fixed him up for
a fine hater. "and now i'm a railroad bull goddam me a railroad bull how's that for a
filthy way to make a living?" mike with his crooked back from the mines standing there
with their breakfasts.
"here you kids. hurry up and eat. you ain't got much time."
they ate. mike went grumbling off and didn't come into the room again. when they
had eaten they lay for a little while looking up at the ceiling and digesting their food.
"you rumbled."
"i did not. besides it isn't nice for you to mention it. it was you anyhow."
"it was a cute little rumble. i liked it."
"you're terrible. you get up first."
"no you get up first."
"oh joe kiss me don't go."
"hurry up you damned kids."
"you get up."
"you."
"i'll count—one two three."
they jumped out of bed. it was chilly. they shivered and laughed at each other and
almost never got dressed for wanting to stop and kiss.
"hurry up you damned kids. you'll miss the train and then joe will be shot by
americans instead of germans. that would be a goddam shame."
there were four train loads of them leaving that morning and there was a terrible
crowd at the station. the whole place the station and the cars and even the locomotives
were draped with bunting and the children and women mostly carried flags little flags
that they waved vaguely vacantly. there were three bands all seeming to play at once and
lots of officers herding people around and songs and the mayor giving an address and
people crying and losing each other and laughing and drunk.
his mother and his sisters were there and kareen was there and mike was there
muttering goddam fools and glaring at everybody and watching kareen sharply.
"and their lives if necessary that democracy may not perish from the face of the
earth "
it's a long way to tiperrary it's a long way to go "don't get scared kareen. it's all
right." "as that great patriot patrick henry said " johnny get your gun get your gun get
your gun "as that great patriot george washington said " "goodbye mother goodbye
catherine goodbye elizabeth. i'll send back half my pay and dad's insurance will hold
out till i get back."
and we won't be back till it's over over there "step lively boy you're in the army
now." pack up your troubles in your old kit bag and smile smile smile
"as that great patriot abraham lincoln said " "where's my boy where's my boy?
he's under age can't you see? he just came up from tucson bout a week ago. they had
him in jail for a tramp and i came all the way here to get him back. they let him out of
jail if he'd join the army. he's only sixteen except he's big and strong for his age he
always was. he's too young i tell you he's just a baby. where is he my little boy?"
goodbye maw goodbye paw goodbye mule with your old hee-haw
"as that great patriot theodore roosevelt has said " america i love you you're like a
sweetheart to me "don't go joe run away they'll kill you i know it i'll never see you
again."
oh kareen why do they have a war right now just when we find each other? kareen
we've got more important things than war. us kareen you and me in a house. i'll come
home at night to you in my house your house our house. we'll have fat happy kids smart
kids too. that's more important than a war. oh kareen kareen i look at you and you're
only nineteen and you're old old like an old woman. kareen i look at you and i cry inside
and i bleed.
just a baby's prayer at twilight when lights are low "as that great patriot woodrow
wilson has said " there's a silver lining through the dark cloud shining "all aboard. all
aboard."
over there over there over there over there over there "goodbye son. write us. we'll
make out." "goodbye mother goodbye catherine goodbye elizabeth don't cry."
"for you are los angeles' own. may god bless you. may god give us victory."
"all aboard. all aboard."
the yanks are coming the yanks are coming
"let us pray. our father which art in heaven"
i can't pray. kareen can't pray. kareen kareen this is no time to pray.
"thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven"
kareen kareen i don't want to go. i want to stay here and be with you and work and
make money and have kids and love you. but i've got to go.
"for thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever amen."
"goodbye mike goodbye kareen i love you kareen."
oh say can you see
"goodbye mother goodbye catherine goodbye elizabeth."
what so proudly we hailed
"you in my arms kareen forever."
whose broad stripes and bright stars
goodbye everybody goodbye. goodbye my son father brother lover husband
goodbye. goodbye goodbye my mother father brother sister sweetheart wife goodbye and
goodbye.
o'er the land of the free and the home of the brave.
"goodbye joe."
"goodbye kareen."
"joe dear darling joe hold me closer. drop your bag and put both of your arms
around me and hold me tightly. put both of your arms around me. both of them."
you in both of my arms kareen goodbye. both of my arms. kareen in my arms. both
of them. arms arms arms arms. i'm fainting in and out all the time kareen and i'm not
catching on quick. you are in my arms kareen. you in both of my arms. both of my arms.
both of them. both
i haven't got any arms kareen.
my arms are gone.
both of my arms are gone kareen both of them.
they're gone.
kareen kareen kareen.
they've cut my arms off both of my arms.
oh jesus mother god kareen they've cut off both of them.
oh jesus mother god kareen kareen kareen my arms.
chapter 4
it was hot. so hot that he seemed to be burning up inside and out. it was so hot he
couldn't breathe. he could only gasp. far off against the sky there was a foggy line of
mountains and moving straight across the desert was the railroad track dancing and
leaping in the heat. it seemed that he and howie were working on the railroad. that was
funny. oh hell things were getting mixed up again. he'd seen all this before. it was like
going into a new drug store for the first time and sitting down and suddenly feeling that
you've been there many times before and that you've already heard what the clerk is
going to say as soon as he comes up to serve you. he and howie working on the railroad
in the heat? sure. sure. it was all right. things were under control.
he and howie were working there in the hot sun laying that railroad straight through
the uintah desert. and he was so hot he felt he was going to die. he felt that if he could
only stop for a little rest he would cool off. but that was the awful thing about a section
gang job. you couldn't ever stop. the fellows didn't laugh and kid as you'd think guys
would either. they didn't say a word. they just worked.
looking at a section gang it always seems as if they are working slow. but you have
to work slow because you never stop and you have just so much strength. you don't stop
because you're afraid. it isn't that you're afraid of the foreman because the foreman never
bothers anybody. it's just that you're afraid for the job and of how much the other guy will
do. so he and howie worked slow and steady trying to keep up with the mexicans.
his head throbbed and he could hear his heart pounding against his ribs and even
down in the calves of his legs he could feel the strong pulse beat and yet he couldn't stop
work even for a minute. his breath came shorter and shorter and it seemed that his lungs
were too small to hold the air he had to get into them if he was going to keep alive. it was
a hundred and twenty-five in the shade and there wasn't any shade and he felt like he was
smothering under a white hot blanket and all he could think was i've got to stop i've got
to stop i've got to stop.
they stopped for lunch.
it was their first day on the gang and he and howie naturally thought they would be
supplied with lunch from the hand car. but they weren't. when the foreman saw they had
nothing to eat he said something to a couple of the mexicans. the mexicans came over
and offered them something out of their lunch pails. the mexicans were eating fried egg
sandwiches all crusted over with red pepper. he and howie just grunted no thanks and
flopped on their backs. then they turned over on their stomachs because the sun was so
hot it would have burned out their eye balls even with the lids closed. the mexicans just
sat and chewed on their fried egg sandwiches and stared at them.
all of a sudden there was the noise of the mexicans getting up so he and howie
rolled over to see what was happening. the whole gang was starting down the tracks on a
slow gallop. the foreman just sat and watched the gang. they asked the foreman what
the idea was and the foreman said the boys were going to take a swim.
the idea of a swim was too much. he and howie jumped up and ran along after
them. the way the foreman spoke they thought they were going just a little piece down
the track. but it turned out they ran two miles before they came to a canal maybe ten feet
wide and mud-colored and beached on both sides with a solid mass of tumbleweeds. the
mexicans started pulling their clothes off. he and howie wondered how they figured to
make it into the water without getting full of thistles. they decided there must be some
path through the weeds or the mexicans wouldn't have tackled the swim in the first place.
by the time they were undressed the mexicans were splashing around in the ditch and
laughing and yelling.
it turned out there wasn't any path through the tumble-weeds after all. they were
ashamed to stand there so naked and white compared to the rest and do nothing about it.
so they began jumping through the tumbleweeds until they were in the water. the water
was hot and it smelled of alkali but that didn't make any difference. it was like an april
shower. he thought about the y.m.c.a. swimming pool in shale city. he thought my
gosh these guys act as if this was the greatest swimming hole in the world. he thought i'll
bet they were never in a swimming pool in their lives. he was standing there with the
mud of the ditch bottom up above his ankles when the mexicans began climbing out and
putting their clothes on again. the swim was over.
by the time he and howie got back to their clothes they were whiskered with thistles
to the hips. they noticed that the mexicans didn't even bother to pick the thistles out.
some of the mexicans were already starting on the trip back to the hand car so they sort
of brushed the thistles off their legs and leaped into their clothes. then they ran the two
miles back and lunch was over and it was time to go to work again.
as the afternoon wore on he and howie began to stumble at their work and finally to
fall. the foreman didn't say anything when they fell down and neither did the mexicans.
the mexicans just stopped and waited for them to get up staring like babies all the while.
when they stumbled back to their feet they began tugging at the rails again. every muscle
in their bodies ached and still they had to keep on working. most of the skin had worn off
their hands. every time they grabbed the hot rail-tongs and lifted they could taste the pain
of raw hands clear into their mouths. the thistles in their feet and legs seemed to go
deeper and deeper with every step they took and they festered and there was no time to
stop and pick them out.
but the aches and bruises and the awful weariness weren't the worst things. his body
could keep up somehow but it was the things inside of him that began to strain and roar.
his lungs got so dry that they squeaked with each breath. his heart swelled from
pumping so hard. he got a little panic-stricken because he knew he couldn't keep it up
and he knew he had to. he wanted to die if that would get him out of work. the ground
began to rise and fall beneath him and things took on a strange color and the man
standing right beside him seemed miles off floating in a fog. there was nothing real but
pain.
the whole afternoon was a mixture of stumbling on his knees in the dust and
fighting for breath and feeling his stomach inside him swell and jerk and draw up hard.
he tried to think of diane. he tried to think of what she looked like. he tried to find her
there in the desert so he would have something to tie to. but he couldn't bring her face
before his eyes. he couldn't even imagine her.
suddenly he thought oh diane you're not worth it. you can't be worth it. no one on
earth except maybe a guy's mother could be worth so much pain. yet working there in the
midst of pain he tried to figure out excuses for diane. maybe she really hadn't meant to
cheat on him. maybe she had dated glen hogan because she couldn't find any other way
out. if that was true and he hoped it was true then it was awfully silly for him to be away
out here in the desert forgetting it all with a bunch of mexicans when he might just as
well be back in the cool shade of shale city enjoying summer vacation and thinking
maybe i'll have a date with diane tonight.
he thought girls are a terrible thing all right. girls are probably all untrue and
faithless and they try to smash a guy but you've just got to expect it from them. you've
had to expect it from them and learn to forgive them because it stood to reason that if you
rushed away like he and howie had and went into the middle of a desert and decided you
would bury yourselves there for the whole three months' summer vacation why nobody
suffered but you. and that left the girl back there in shale city to go out with glen hogan
as much as she wanted to. tugging and stumbling and trying to breathe he suddenly had
an awful feeling come over him. he was asking himself a question. he was saying to
himself joe bonham have you beeen a fool?
somebody hollered out that it was quitting time and things began to dissolve slowly
in front of his eyes. when he got them back into focus he was lying on his stomach with
his head hanging over the side of the hand car and howie lying beside him. he
remembered looking down at the ground as it ran like water in front of his eyes and
hearing those mexicans singing. they were taking turns pumping away on that hand car
to get them back to the bunkhouse. he just lay there gagging a little and listening to them
sing.
the bunkhouse had a dirt floor. it was a sort of shed with a tin roof. it was so hot
inside that he wanted to reach out with his hands for air to stuff into his lungs. the bunks
were wood one on top of the other. he and howie staggered to a pair of bunks that were
together. they didn't even bother to unroll their bedding. they just flopped on the bunks
and lay there quiet and still. the foreman came up and asked if they wanted him to show
them where they could get dinner. but they didn't pay any attention to him. they just lay
back and closed their eyes.
he had reached a funny state. it was the first time in his life he had ever felt that way.
no one part of his body hurt more than any other part so the pain everywhere stopped and
he was only numb and sleepy. he thought about diane again. not for very long but she
was the last thought in his mind before the darkness. he thought about diane tiny and
cute and scared the first time he kissed her. oh diane he thought how could you have
done such a thing? how could you have done it? and then somebody was shaking him.
they might have been shaking him for hours for all he knew. he opened his eyes. he
was still in the bunkhouse. it was dark and the air was filled with sighs. there was a
smell of smoke in the place. the mexicans had cooked their supper over a fire in the
middle of the floor. there was a hole in the tin roof for the smoke to escape through. he
could see the stars through it flickering like something in a fever dream. he gagged. the
smell of food and smoke in the air. wasn't it just like a mexican to want something piping
hot for supper after spending a whole day in the bottom of hell? it was howie shaking
him. "wake up. it's ten o'clock."
he didn't know whether it was night or whether his eye sockets had just burned out
and he couldn't tell sunlight from dark.
"morning or night?" "night."
"tonight or last night?"
"last night i guess. hey look what i got. they just sent it over from the dispatcher's
office."
howie stuck something in front of his face and turned his pocket flashlight on it.
they had remembered to bring a flashlight even if they had forgotten gloves. it was a
telegram howie was showing him. the corners of it were all bloody where howie had
been holding it. it read dear howie why were you so impetuous stop i am miserable
thinking what you have done stop please forgive me and come right back to shale city
stop i hate glen hogan stop love onie.
even in the dimness of the bunkhouse he could see the happiness on howie's face.
so onie hated glen hogan did she? well he knew why and if howie didn't know why
then howie was a fool. onie hated glen hogan because glen had thrown her over for
diane. he thought about this for a little bit and about how much prettier diane was than
onie and about how the whole thing showed what good judgment glen hogan had. then
he saw that howie was waiting for an answer. when he tried to answer he found he could
only whisper.
"why do you have to wake a guy up who needs sleep as bad as i do just to show him
that?" "because i got it all figured out." "uh."
howie began to whisper very excitedly. "it's just like this. for fellows like you and
me to be out here slaving our best years away on a section gang is just
as if girls nice girls like onie and diane suddenly decided to become
washerwomen."
he didn't say anything. he just lay there and thought about it. he could see the point
all right. the idea of diane being a washerwoman was so awful he just closed his eyes
again. howie was whispering at him.
"of course since onie feels that way i hardly know what to do about the poor kid."
he just lay there with his eyes closed saying nothing.
"it isn't as if i didn't have a reason to go back. it's almost as if it was my duty to."
he just lay there limp. but he was listening to howie very closely.
"the dispatcher says there's a gravel train going through here tonight bound for
shale city."
still he didn't say anything. still he listened.
"it would get us there in an hour."
he kind of moved his leg to show he was still awake listening.
"that gravel train goes through here in ten minutes."
he jumped off his bunk and in one motion had his bed roll over his shoulders. howie
stared at him in surprise.
"what you doing?"
he gave howie a look to show the whole thing was on howie's shoulders.
"well if you're bound and determined to back out on our agreement i guess there's
nothing i can do to stop you. if we're going to get that gravel train we better be getting
outside."
most of the way riding into shale city he thought about bill harper. he thought to
himself only last night i hit bill harper. he thought to himself bill harper was my best
friend and he was telling me the truth and i hit him for it. he lay back against the gravel
and stared up at the stars. he thought how he and bill harper had sat in the drug store and
how bill harper had hemmed and hawed and how he had finally come to the point. he
remembered all over again the rage he felt when bill harper told him that diane was
going out that night with glen hogan. he knew it was probably true or bill harper
wouldn't have told him. yet he had stood up and he had called bill harper a liar and he
had hit bill harper and knocked him down and then he had walked out of the drug store
alone.
on the way home he had run into diane and glen hogan just getting out of glen's
roadster and going into the elysium theatre. then he knew that bill harper had been telling
him the truth. he knew that diane had been cheating on him.
down the block he met howie. howie had been having trouble with onie over glen
hogan so they both decided to leave it all and go out into the desert and work like men
and forget about it. it wasn't like he and howie were the same. howie had never been
able to keep a girl. he kind of resented howie including him in his class. but he wanted
to get away so badly that when howie suggested it he said let's go tomorrow.
he lay on the gravel car and remembered all the camping trips and the swell times he
and bill harper had had together. he remembered the first time either of them took a girl
out. they made it a foursome because they were so scared. he remembered the time
major his pup was run over and how bill came over that night with his old man's car and
took him riding out in the country until after midnight and didn't say a word all that time
because bill knew how he felt. he remembered lots of other times too and he thought bill
harper is too good a friend to lose over any girl. he thought bill is too good a friend to
lose even over diane and tomorrow i will tell him so. tomorrow i will go over to his
house and say bill let's forget about it. bill let's be friends because it won't ever happen
again.
and then as the gravel train got closer to shale city he thought back to diane again.
in the coolness of the night he could bring her face up before his mind. he hadn't been
able to do it out there on the desert. he could bring her face up before his mind and she
was smiling. he thought howie believed he had lost onie but he hadn't because onie
admitted she was wrong and asked him to come back. he thought besides i don't want
diane running around with glen hogan. anybody but glen hogan. just because glen
had a good looking car he seemed to think he could take liberties with a girl that the
ordinary guy would never think of. he felt scary whenever he thought of diane and glen
hogan together. he saw where it was more or less his duty to see diane and talk to her
like a brother and tell her about glen hogan. he knew that he had to save diane the embarrassment
of finding out for herself what kind of guy glen hogan was. he must do that
even at the expense of his pride.
they dropped off the gravel train just outside the station because they didn't want
anybody to see them they were such sights. they walked for two blocks and then howie
stopped.
"well i'll be leaving you here."
"where are you going?"
"thought i'd drop by onie's house."
howie said it in a dreamy kind of way and a little insinuating too because he knew
there was no place for joe to go but home. howie who could never keep a girl. huh!
howie walked off into the darkness. he was all alone. he started home. shale city
seemed like the prettiest town in the world that night. the sky was pale blue and there
were about a million stars shining. the trees were all black-green and a cool breeze was
playing through them. it seemed all of a sudden as if the desert and the section gang had
never existed at all. he was awfully tired but there was no one watching him to see that
he kept moving and he knew he could stop and rest whenever he wanted to and somehow
he had got his second wind so he didn't even notice the weight of his bed roll. he just
seemed to drift along there in the cool. it was a little after eleven o'clock.
and then he suddenly knew why he felt so good when all the time he should be
feeling bad. it was because he was on diane's street. he hadn't deliberately planned to be
there because it was a couple of blocks out of his way and he was really awfully tired. it
just seemed that something pulled him over to that street and he was glad for it. even on
ordinary nights he always had the funniest feeling when he got near diane's house. he
always got tight in his throat and half way excited and half way scared whenever he came
near to where she lived.
then all of a sudden he thought here you can't be passing diane's house all bloodyhanded
and dirty like you are now. you can't run the risk of letting her see you in this
condition. so he went across the street and started walking on his tip toes as if she might
be asleep and the very sound of his footsteps might wake her and frighten her. and all the
time something inside him was saying tomorrow you'll see her tomorrow you'll see her
tomorrow you'll see her.
then just across from her place he stopped still and quit breathing. diane was there
on the front steps with her arms around somebody and somebody's arms around her. they
were kissing. he didn't do anything. he just stood there a little behind a tree and watched.
he didn't want to watch and yet he wanted to watch more than anything else he could
think of. he felt ashamed watching and yet he couldn't move one inch from the spot. he
just stood there. he just stood there and watched.
pretty soon the guy she was kissing let her go and diane ran up the steps in that
funny little way she always had and turned just as she got to the door to smile. he
couldn't see her face of course but he knew she was smiling. a minute of that and then
whoever she had been kissing turned away and began coming down the walk. he was
whistling. he was whistling softly and kind of bouncing up and down as he walked away
from having kissed diane. when he got out from between the trees the starlight fell on
his face. it was bill harper.
still he stood there. bill harper walked on down the street and turned the corner. the
light in diane's living room went on and off. next the light in her bedroom came on. he
saw her shadow on the curtain twice as she crossed. then the light went off. he stood
there and thought goodbye diane goodbye.
then he started walking home.
every muscle in his body was sore. his hands and his stomach and his head throbbed
and burned. the bed roll seemed to weigh a hundred pounds almost. but that wasn't what
hurt him. it was something inside of him kept saying you're no good. you're just no good.
people would ask why don't i see you and diane together any more? and there would
be nothing he could say. people would ask what's the matter with you and bill harper
that we don't see you around any more? and there would be nothing he could say. his dad
would ask how come you got a job on the section gang and stayed only one day? and
there would be nothing he could say.
it was all over. it was something he could never explain. something nobody would
understand. he had lost the only friend he might have told it to. because he knew that he
and bill could never again be what they had been. they might shake hands and say forget
it old man and start bumming around together a little but it wouldn't be the same. and
both of them would know it. both of them would know that diane was there between
them. both of them would also know that diane probably didn't care but that wouldn't
make things any different for them. they'd never be able to explain it even to themselves.
but more than that he thought about diane. it seemed like dying to think he would
never see her again really and that he would never be close to her again and that they
would never laugh and kid each other again. it wasn't glen hogan who had done it. he
could have forgiven her for glen hogan. he could have forgiven her for that and tried to
make it all up. the awful thing was that she had done something he couldn't forgive her
for ever no matter how much he wanted to. and he did want to. he did want to awfully.
but he never could.
going to bed he thought oh why does a guy have to go through something like this?
he thought why don't they take him out and shoot him while there's still something worth
while in him? he thought why everybody has a best friend. even guys in the penitentiary
probably have best friends somewhere. but i haven't. he thought even howie has a girl.
even those mexicans singing on their way out of the desert have girls. but i haven't. he
thought why everybody can find some little spark of self respect inside himself. even a
murderer or a thief or a dog or an ant has something that keeps its head up and going. but
i haven't.
that night in bed was the first time he ever cried over a girl. he just lay there and
bawled like a kid. his hands were bloody and his legs were full of thistles and his eyes
were full of tears and he was sick at heart. it took him a long time to go to sleep.
it all seemed so real at the time and now it wasn't real at all. that was a long time
ago. that was in shale city. that was before he came to los angeles. that was when he
was a kid in high school. it seemed so long ago. somewhere probably in colorado glen
hogan and howie were still kicking around. he had got a letter once saying bill harper
had been killed at belleau wood. bill harper was a lucky guy. bill harper had got diane
and then he had been killed.
oh christ he was all mixed up again. he didn't know where he was or what he was
doing. but he was cooling off. he wasn't burning up any more. he was just light headed
and confused and he couldn't figure things out. everything was a mess but at least he was
cool.
chapter 5
he couldn't get used to the way things were melting into each other. sometimes he was
drifting on top of white clouds frightened at his smallness in the midst of a thing so big as
the sky. sometimes he was cushioned in soft pillows that had a way of sliding him feet
first over rough and uneven ground. but mostly he was floating in some backwash of the
colorado river where it wandered through shale city. he was lying in the water of a
river that ran through home long before he came to los angeles long before he met
kareen long long before he went away on a bunting-covered train with the mayor making
speeches.
he was floating on his back. there were willows near the edge of the water and
sweet clover. there was hot sunshine on his face but his stomach and back were cool
from water that had been snow in the mountains not long ago. he was floating there and
thinking about kareen.
it's fine kareen floating here. lie back more like this like that. isn't it nice kareen i
love it i love you. float kareen keep your head out of the water so you can breathe. keep
real close to me kareen isn't it swell floating here not going anywhere and not even
caring to go anywhere? just letting the river take care of things. nothing to do and
nowhere to go. being on top of the river cool and hot and thoughtful yet not thinking a
thing.
stay closer kareen. don't go away. closer closer kareen and watch out for the water
coming over your face. i can't turn over on my stomach to swim kareen i can only float
so please don't go so far away. kareen where are you i can't find you and the water was
coming over your face. don't sink kareen don't let the water come over your face. come
back kareen you'll choke you'll fill up like i'm filling up. you'll go down kareen watch
out please watch out. come back kareen. you're gone. you weren't even there. just me
alone in the river with water coming over my nose and mouth and eyes.
the water was washing over his face and he couldn't stop it. it was like his head was
too heavy for his body and he couldn't let it lie back without sinking. or maybe his body
was too light for his head so that there wasn't enough weight to balance his head and keep
it high. the water was lapping over his eyes and nose and mouth and he was sputtering
from it. it seemed like he was going feet first on his back against the stream only he was
going like a sled with his feet and legs entirely out of the water and his head below the
surface. he was going faster and faster and if he didn't stop why he'd drown from so
much water rushing over his face.
he was beginning to drown already. he strained the muscles of his neck trying to
raise his nose out of the water but it wouldn't come up. he tried to swim but how can a
man swim if he hasn't got any arms? he sank down and down and down and finally he
drowned. it seemed like he drowned without even a struggle way down in the dark bottom
of the river while above him maybe only six or eight feet there was sunlight and
willows and sweet clover and air. he drowned without a struggle because he couldn't
struggle. he didn't seem to have anything to struggle with. it was like a bad dream where
someone is chasing you and you're scared to death only there's nothing to do about it
because you can't run. your legs are stuck in concrete and you can't move a muscle. that
was why he drowned.
he lay there under the water and thought what a shame it is to drown when you're
maybe only six or eight feet from air and sunlight. what a goddam shame it is to drown
when if you could only stand up and stretch your hand above your head you might touch
a willow branch trailing in the water like the hair of a girl like kareen's hair. but when
you're drowned you can't stand up. when you're dead and drowned there's nothing left
except time going on and on like water over your body.
things began to shoot back and forth in front of his eyes. rockets and bombs and
pinwheels and curves of fire and great white flares whirled through his head and sank
into the soft wet part of his brain with a hissing sound. he could hear the hissing very
plainly. it was like the escape of steam from a locomotive. he could hear explosions and
howls and whines and words that didn't mean anything and whistles too high and shrill
that they cut through ms ears like knives. everything was dazzling and deafening. it hurt
so much that he thought all the pain in the world was trapped somewhere between his
forehead and the back of his skull and trying to hammer its way out. the pain was so bad
that all he could think of was please please please i'd rather die.
then things quieted down all of a sudden. everything went still inside his head. the
lights before his eyes snapped out as quickly as if somebody had shut them off with a
switch. the pain went away too. the only feeling he had was the strong throb of blood in
his brain swelling and contracting his head. but it was peaceful. it was painless. it was
such a relief that he came out of his drowning. he could think.
he thought well kid you're deaf as a post but there isn't the pain. you've got no arms
but you don't hurt. you'll never burn your hand or cut your finger or smash a nail you
lucky stiff. you're alive and you don't hurt and that's much better than being alive and
hurting. there are lots of things a deaf guy without arms can do if he doesn't hurt so
much he goes crazy from pain. he can get hooks or something for arms and he can learn
to read lips and while that doesn't exactly put him on top of the world still he's not
drowned in the bottom of a river with pain tearing his brain to pieces. he's still got air
and he's not struggling and he's got willow trees and he can think and he's not in pain.
he couldn't understand why the nurses or whoever had charge of him wouldn't lay
him out level. the lower half of him was light as a feather while his head and chest were
dead weights. that was why he had thought he was drowning. his head was too low. if
he could move whatever was under his legs and bring his body to an even level he'd feel
better. he wouldn't have that drowning dream any more.
he started to kick out with his feet to move what was under his legs. he only started
because he didn't have any legs to kick with. somewhere just below his hip joints they
had cut both of his legs off.
no legs.
no more running walking crawling if you have no legs. no more working.
no legs you see.
never again to wiggle your toes. what a hell of a thing what a wonderful beautiful
thing to wiggle your toes.
no no.
if he could only think of real things he would destroy this dream of having no legs.
steamships loaves of bread girls kareen machine guns books chewing gum pieces of
wood kareen but thinking of real things didn't help because it wasn't a dream.
it was the truth.
that was why his head had seemed lower than his legs. because he had no legs.
naturally they seemed light. air is light too. even a toenail is heavy compared to air.
he had no arms and no legs.
he threw back his head and started to yell from fright. but he only started because he
had no mouth to yell with. he was so surprised at not yelling when he tried that he began
to work his jaws like a man who has found something interesting and wants to test it. he
was so sure the idea of no mouth was a dream that he could investigate it calmly. he tried
to work his jaws and he had no jaws. he tried to run his tongue around the inside of his
teeth and over the roof of his mouth as if he were chasing a raspberry seed. but he didn't
have any tongue and he hadn't any teeth. there was no roof to his mouth and there was
no mouth. he tried to swallow but he couldn't because he had no palate and there weren't
any muscles left to swallow with.
he began to smother and pant. it was as if someone had pushed a mattress over his
face and was holding it there. he was breathing hard and fast now but he wasn't really
breathing because there wasn't any air passing through his nose. he didn't have a nose.
he could feel his chest rise and fall and quiver but not a breath of air was passing through
the place where his nose used to be.
he got a wild panicky eagerness to die to kill himself. he tried to calm his breathing
to stop breathing entirely so he would suffocate. he could feel the muscles at the bottom
of his throat close tight against the air but the breathing in his chest kept right on. there
wasn't any air in his throat to be stopped. his lungs were sucking it in somewhere below
his throat.
he knew now that he was surely dying but he was curious. he didn't want to die until
he had found out everything. if a man has no nose and no mouth and no palate and no
tongue why it stands to reason he might be shy a few other parts as well. but that was
nonsense because a man in that shape would be dead. you couldn't lose that much of
yourself and still keep on living. yet if you knew you had lost them and were thinking
about it why then you must be alive because dead men don't think. dead men aren't
curious and he was sick with curiosity so he must not be dead yet.
he began to reach out with the nerves of his face. he began to strain to feel the
nothingness that was there. where his mouth and nose had been there must now be
nothing but a hole covered with bandages. he was trying to find out how far up that hole
went. he was trying to feel the edges of the hole. he was grasping with the nerves and
pores of his face to follow the borders of that hole and see how far up they extended.
it was like staring into complete darkness with your eyes popping out of your head.
it was a process of feeling with his skin of exploring with something that couldn't move
where his mind told it to. the nerves and muscles of his face were crawling like snakes
toward his forehead.
the hole began at the base of his throat just below where his jaw should be and went
upward in a widening circle.
he could feel his skin creeping around the rim of the circle. the hole was getting
bigger and bigger. it widened out almost to the base of his ears if he had any and then
narrowed again. it ended somewhere above the top of what used to be his nose.
the hole went too high to have any eyes in it.
he was blind.
it was funny how calm he was. he was quiet just like a storekeeper taking spring
inventory and saying to himself 1 see i have no eyes better put that down in the order
book. he had no legs and no arms and no eyes and no ears and no nose and no mouth and
no tongue. what a hell of a dream. it must be a dream. of course sweet god it's a dream.
he'd have to wake up or he'd go nuts. nobody could live like that. a person in that
condition would be dead and he wasn't dead so he wasn't in that condition. just dreaming.
but it wasn't a dream.
he could want it to be a dream forever and that wouldn't change things. because he
was alive alive. he was nothing but a piece of meat like the chunks of cartliage old prof
vogel used to have in biology. chunks of cartilage that didn't have anything except life so
they grew on chemicals. but he was one up on the cartilage. he had a mind and it was
thinking. that's more than prof vogel could ever say of his cartilages. he was thinking
and he was just a thing.
oh no. no no no.
he couldn't live like this because he would go crazy. but he couldn't die because he
couldn't kill himself. if he could only breathe he could die. that was funny but it was
true. he could hold his breath and kill himself. that was the only way left. except that he
wasn't breathing. his lungs were pumping air but he couldn't stop them from doing it. he
couldn't live and he couldn't die.
no no no that can't be right.
no no.
mother.
mother where are you?
hurry mother hurry hurry hurry and wake me up. i'm having a nightmare mother
where are you? hurry mother. i'm down here. here mother. here in the darkness. pick me
up. rockabye baby. now i lay me down to sleep. oh mother hurry because i can't wake
up. over here mother. when the wind blows the cradle will rock. hold me up high high.
mother you've gone away and forgotten me. here i am. i can't wake up mother.
wake me up. i can't move. hold me. i'm scared. oh mother mother sing to me and rub me
and bathe me and comb my hair and wash out my ears and play with my toes and clap my
hands together and blow my nose and kiss my eyes and mouth like i've seen you do with
elizabeth like you must have done with me. then i'll wake up and i'll be with you and i'll
never leave or be afraid or dream again.
oh no.
i can't. i can't stand it. scream. move. shake something. make a noise any noise. i
can't stand it. oh no no no.
please i can't. please no. somebody come. help me. i can't lie here forever like this
until maybe years from now i die. i can't. nobody can. it isn't possible.
i can't breathe but i'm breathing. i'm so scared i can't think but i'm thinking. oh
please please no. no no. it isn't me. help me. it can't be me. not me. no no no.
oh please oh oh please. no no no please no. please.
not me.
chapter 6
at the bakery he walked all night long. he walked eleven miles every night. he walked
with his legs on the cement floor and his arms in the air swinging free. he hardly ever got
tired. when you got to thinking about it it wasn't bad. walking all night long and working
hard and getting eighteen dollars at the end of the week for your trouble. not bad.
friday nights were always the heaviest in the night shipping department because on
saturday morning the drivers would take out enough bread and pies and cakes and rolls
to last their customers over sunday. that made a hell of a lot of work and a hell of a lot of
walking on friday nights. but it wasn't bad. they always sent to the midnight mission
for an extra man to work with the crew on friday nights. the guys from the mission
came stinking of disinfectant and looking very bedraggled and embarrassed. they knew
that anyone who smelled the disinfectant knew they were bums on charity. they didn't
like that and how could you blame them? they were always humble and when they were
bright enough they worked hard. some of them weren't bright. some of them couldn't
even read the orders on the bins. one of them came from the turpentine country in
georgia. he'd never been to school at all. most of the lazy ones came from texas.
one night a porto rican came up from the mission. his name was jose. things were
always pretty scrambled up in the shipping room on friday nights with boxes and dollies
and racks scattered through the aisles and guys hollering and the conveyor belts rattling
away and the rotary ovens upstairs screeching as they moved on hot greaseless plates. it
was pretty much of a mess and most of the mission guys were confused when they first
came to work. but not jose. he looked over the place and listened quietly to instructions
and then went to work. he was tall with brown eyes and he was pretty good looking for a
mexican or porto rican or whatever he was. there was something about him that told
you he was a little different from the other mission guys or that maybe he had been a
little luckier than the rest.
on friday nights all the guys ate their lunches up in the men's can instead of going
out to a restaurant because there were benches and lockers there and you could sit down
on the benches and eat your lunch in a hurry and get back to work. jose hadn't brought
any lunch so the guys stole a pint of milk from the bakery ice-box and gave him a roll
with it. joe was very grateful. while he munched his roll and drank his milk he talked. he
said that california was a wonderful country. he said it was even more wonderful than
his porto rico. he said that it was getting spring now and soon he would be able to sleep
in the park. he said california was a great country for people who had no place to sleep
because it didn't get so cold and you could wrap up in an overcoat in the park and get a
very good night's sleep thank you. he said he wished he could get a steady job at the
bakery because then he could manage to keep clean. he didn't like to be dirty and he
didn't like the disinfectant they put in the water at the mission. there were a lot of poor
men down at the mission who didn't seem to mind the disinfectant but he minded it very
much.
he said he had come to california to go into the movies. no he didn't want to be an
actor. but there should be many jobs for a young man like himself with ambition in a
business as great as the movies. he said that he thought he might like to work in the
research department at one of the studios. perhaps someone could give him some
information about getting a job in a studio yes?
the guys just looked at him and grunted. if any of them knew how to get work in a
studio wouldn't they have done it long ago instead of sticking around this lousy bakery?
no. nobody knew how to get work for jose in a studio.
jose just shrugged. it was pretty hard he said. when he came to new york things
were going very well for him and then a very rich girl fell in love with him and he had to
come away from there.
a rich girl fallen in love with you jose?
yes. he had got a job as chauffeur for a very rich family that lived on fifth avenue
and things were very well and then the daughter of the family took a liking to him so jose
and the daughter struck a bargain. the daughter wanted to learn spanish and jose wanted
to improve his english so they started trading lessons. and then the girl she fell in love
with him and wanted to marry him and so he had to come away from new york and he
came to california.
the guys sitting around in the can just looked at each other and didn't say anything.
everybody who came from the mission had a line. everybody had been way up in the
money and then wham something had happened and now they were in the mission. long
ago the guys at the bakery learned that it was no use to argue with guys from the mission.
no matter how closely you questioned them and no matter how many of their stories you
proved were lies they still stuck to them. they had to stick to them. their stories were
their only excuse for being what they were so in time the guys at the bakery came to
accept the stories told by the guys from the mission and to say nothing. so after jose got
through with his talking they grunted and went back to work again.
next week was easter and that meant hot cross buns and that meant there would
have to be lots of extra help because the shipping crew couldn't put out twenty or thirty
thousand dozen hot cross buns without extra men. so jody simmons offered jose a job
for the week and jose took it. he was such a good worker on hot cross buns that when
larruping larry quit jose got larry's job. he was very grateful and very quiet. he was
also pleased that the weather was warmer. he was sleeping in the park and that was a
wonderful thing. you saved money and jose needed money for clothes. a man who is
going to work in the studios must be well dressed said jose.
then one day jose came in with a letter. he was very puzzled. he showed it to the
guys and asked their advice. americans were such strange people he said and you never
knew what their customs were exactly. so what should a gentleman do under these
circumstances?
the guys all read jose's letter. it was on a very expensive piece of stationery and
written in a woman's hand. at the top of the page was a tiny little engraved address on
fifth avenue in new york. it was a letter from the girl jose had been telling about. in the
letter she said she wished he would give her his address so she wouldn't have to be writing
him general delivery all the time. she had come into some money of her own just a
little over a half a million dollars and as soon as she found out where jose was living she
was coming to los angeles to marry him.
this gave the guys at the bakery something to think about. jose might be full of bull
like all the other mission bums but it began to look like this girl of his was the real thing.
jesus christ they said to jose don't be a damn fool marry the girl. send her your address
and let her come out just as fast as she can and let her bring all her jack with her and
marry her before she changes her mind. but jose shook his head. he said there wasn't any
danger of her changing her mind because like he had said the girl was crazy about him.
and certainly he had no objections to marrying a girl with money. in fact he thought the
only intelligent thing for a young man without money to do was to marry a young lady
who had money. but he wanted also to love the girl with money that he would marry
some day. this girl it was too bad but he didn't love her.
well i'm a sonofabitch said the guys at the bakery you can learn to love her can't
you? no said jose sorrowfully i cannot. he just wanted to know what the american
custom about such things was and how he could write the girl and explain to her. was it
polite for an american gentleman to tell an american girl he didn't love her? but no of
course not that would be ungallant. would it not be better to have a friend maybe one of
the people of the bakery write to the girl and explain to her that jose had shot himself because
of his love and now was cremated? jose was willing to do anything to make it
right.
by this time all the guys figured jose was crazy. but they also figured he was kind of
smart crazy. when he told tall stories about his native porto rico the guys paid more attention
to him figuring that since his story about the girl was true there might be a fiftyfifty
chance that his stories about porto rico were also true. jose was a very funny guy
but then the bakery was full of funny guys and it was just as well not to question them too
closely. you took them as they came and said nothing.
after about a month of this jose came in one night with a very worried look on his
face.
what's the matter jose? why do you look so down in the dumps jose? jose sighed
and frowned. he had run into a very serious problem he said. what problem jose? he had
been out all day as usual he said looking for a job and he had found the job.
they all got interested then because everybody at the bakery wanted a better job only
none of them ever found one. where did you get this better job jose? in a studio of course
said jose. that is why i came to california. didn't i tell you i came to find work in the
studios?
nobody said anything. they just stared at jose. from anybody else this would have
seemed like more bull but from jose they knew it was the truth. how did you like that?
as far as the guys at the bakery were concerned the studios might just as well be in china
as in hollywood. they paid good dough but nobody except an uncle or maybe a nephew
could crack them. yet jose just as calm as a cucumber had walked into one and got what
he wanted.
how did you get this job jose? i asked for it said jose. oh said the guys at the
bakery. then they sat around and stared at him some more. finally somebody spoke up
and said jose what's all this about a problem and why are you so worried?
jose looked surprised. anybody should know that he said. he had come to california
and he had been without money and he had been full of disinfectant from the midnight
mission and he had been very unhappy. then this nice gentleman jody simmons had
accepted him into the bakery and given him a fine job. that made him indebted to jody
simmons no? very well. he was indebted to jody simmons and now he had found a job.
how was he to get out of the job jody simmons had given him in order to take the new
job without offending his benefactor?
all the guys began to get excited. each one had a different speech he would tell jody
simmons to get out of the job. one guy thought a good way to do was to punch jody
simmons right smack in the snoot. another guy said just to walk in politely and tell jody
simmons to shove the job up his ass. another one said just not to show up for work
tomorrow and jody simmons would catch on real quick. and there were several other
ways the guys at the bakery could think of. there ought to have been. they'd been
thinking of them for years. a lot of talent had gone to waste thinking of ways to tell jody
simmons you were quitting. here was a guy who was actually going to do it so naturally
everyone cooperated.
but when all of the solutions had been offered to him jose shook his head and his
eyes looked sadder than ever. he said no he must think of a better way. it would not be
gentlemanly to resign in any of the ways suggested. jody simmons was his benefactor
and one did not do such things to one's benefactor. even if it were an american custom to
do it differently still he would have to follow the customs of his native porto rico and in
porto rico one did not do such things if one were well born.
when you start work on this job jose? this morning said jose and i am very tired
and now i am going to have to work all night and that will make me much tireder in the
morning for the other job and so it will go and it is a terrible problem and i don't know
what to do.
so jose worked all night and the guys in the bakery thought about it and it finally
became as puzzling to them as it was to jose. they would start to think of a way out for
jose and begin to speak and then they would shake their heads and say no that wouldn't
do it and then they would go on with their work thinking very hard. this guy jose was a
very queer duck and his ideas were crazy but everybody by this time wanted to find a
solution so it became a matter of deep interest to the whole night crew.
the night ended. all the guys in the crew went home and slept and then came back
to work that night wondering about jose. jose came back too. he was getting pale. he
said he was feeling very tired. he said he had gotten only forty-five minutes sleep and
that unless he thought of something pretty soon he didn't know what he was going to do.
he said surely there must be some american custom to cover his emergency. but they
had told him all the american customs the night before and he had turned them down.
so he worked the second night through and when he left in the morning and faced
the first glare of sunlight outside the bakery he was a very weak looking man. all the next
day he worked for the studio and the next night when he came to work he was almost
tottering. he said please please think of some way i can quit this job because a man's
health will last only for so long and mine is breaking rapidly since i had no sleep at all
today and a man must have sleep if he is going to handle even one job in an honest
fashion.
then pinky carson happened to think of something. jose said pinky carson i'll tell
you what you do. about two in the morning when the pie run comes down you just pick
up six or eight pies in their boxes and walk over in front of where that little window is out
of jody's office so he can see you and you drop those damned pies. then jody'll fire you
and everything will be all right. jose thought for a little while. i do not like the use of
violence he said finally but i am a desperate man and if you think violence will work i
will use it. he thought a little more and then said i can pay for these pies i have violated
yes? everybody said yes if he wanted to be a fool he could pay for the pies he violated.
so that night about two or three o'clock jose took six pies and stationed himself in
the direct line of jody's vision outside the window of jody's lean-to office. all the guys
were close around looking as if they were working but really watching jose. they were
watching for the minute when jody simmons would look out through that window from
his desk. when he looked pinky was to give a signal and then jose would dump the pies.
it seemed that it took jody longer to look out that window than it ever had before. but
finally he did and pinky carson gave the signal and jose dropped the pies.
jody came zipping out of his office like a bumblebee. he said what the hell is the
matter with you you clumsy bastard you turned all these pies over. they're ruined and
you'll have to pay for them. poor jose stood there almost melting with sadness. he turned
his big eyes on jody simmons and he said i am so sorry mister simmons that i have
violated pies. it was an accident i assure you and only a poor workman would have done
it and i am miserable about it and i will gladly pay for them and you will accept my
apologies yes?
jody simmons looked real hard at jose for a moment and then a smile broke over his
face and he said why sure jose we all make mistakes. you can pay for the pies. he said
jose you are a good conscientious workman and i don't mind if you make a mistake once
in a while. he said jose i wish i had more men like you now forget about the whole thing
and go back to work.
jose stood there kind of quivering all over and shaking his head as if he couldn't
believe such bad luck could happen to him. then he turned and looked at the guys in the
crew who had been watching. he looked at pinky carson like a dog that has been
betrayed by its master. then he turned and walked over in the first aisle and began to go
to work again.
pinky carson worked over toward him as soon as possible. look here jose he said
the idea was all right only it wasn't big enough. to quit a fine job like this you want to do
something very big. the pie run is all finished for tonight but don't give up hope jose
because we have a pie run every night and tomorrow you can get one of those big racks
of pies. you can get one of those racks that has a hundred and eighty pies just think of it
and you can put that rack in the same place and then you can push the rack over and it
will make a hell of a mess. oh boy oh boy what a mess and then jody simmons will fire
you sure.
jose looked at pinky carson and said the whole thing is very dishonorable but my
constitution will not stand very much more so i will do it tomorrow night when the pie
run comes. then he staggered back to his work.
most of the guys couldn't sleep next day they were so anxious to see jose dump over
that rack. they all came to work early. jody simmons didn't get in until around ten
o'clock usually. but everybody was hoping he would be in early so they would have a
longer time to look at the face of a man who was going to see one hundred and eighty
pies turned over right in front of his office. but when they passed jody's office and
looked into it jody wasn't there. there was nothing but a big long box that looked like a
floral box lying on jody's desk. they all glanced at the box and then went on upstairs and
changed for work and pretty soon jose came in. the first part of the night was the longest
any of them ever put in.
about ten o'clock jody simmons checked in. everybody watched because everybody
was curious about that box on his desk. jody walked into the office and stared at the box
like it might be a time bomb. he was a very tough man and anything unusual about the
place always aroused his suspicions. finally he must have decided the box was safe
because he began to open it very carefully. two dozen american beauty roses fell out of
it onto his desk. jody began pawing through the roses to find a card but there wasn't any
card. when rudy went into jody's office to get the night hot sheets he looked at the
flowers and said well i see you got some flowers jody. jody just glared at the flowers and
said that somebody was pulling something funny. but he didn't care because the roses
were good and he could take them to his wife. he sent rudy out to get a can of water to
put the roses in so they'd stay fresh. all that night whenever the guys looked toward the
little window in jody's office they saw jody's bald little head looking as if it wore a
wreath of roses.
at two o'clock the pie run began. pinky carson went upstairs to the bakeshop while
they were being boxed to check up on them. that night they had apple and vanilla cream
and blueberry and peach. pinky carson hefted each kind and tested its crust and the
thickness of the filling. the crew was well up on its work that night so they could catch
the pie run while it was still hot. pinky carson decided that the blueberry pies would run
the best if they were dumped. so he very carefully picked a rack of the hottest and
brought them down on the freight elevator to jose.
jose was trembling like a leaf. all the guys stationed near jody simmons' window
looked like they were working but they were really doing nothing but making motions.
very carefully pinky worked the pie rack over to the spot in front of jody simmons'
window. then he ducked to one side and began making signals to jose. jose came up
looking like a whipped dog. he went to the pie rack and put his hand up against the back
of it. it wouldn't take much of a push to knock it over. jose stood there just leaning
against it and looking sad. everybody was waiting for jody simmons to look out of the
window. it seemed like hours. finally he did and pinky carson gave the signal. jose just
pushed a little harder with his hand and the rack went down with a hell of a crash. one
hundred and eighty hot blueberry pies spread all over the shipping room floor.
for a minute jody just sat in his chair and stared. he looked like he couldn't believe a
thing like this could ever happen to him. then it looked like someone gave him an
electrical shock because instead of pushing his chair back before getting up he shot
straight up like a man on a stove and came running and hollering out of his office. jose
just stood there and looked at him. jose was much taller than jody simmons. he looked
down at jody and his eyes were the saddest things on earth. jody began screaming at him
you lousy spick bastard last night i gave you another chance and tonight what do you do?
you smash one hundred and eighty blueberry pies. you know what this means you
sonofabitch? this means you're through you're fired get out. get out and don't ever let me
see you again you lousy dirty spick get out.
jose stood for a minute and looked at jody simmons like he was forgiving him for
everything he said. then he turned and walked slowly up to the can. all the guys as quick
as they could sneaked up there after him. jose was almost talking to himself. this is the
first time i have ever done anything so dishonorable said jose. never have i thought i
would stoop to such trickery. mister simmons he is quite right. he is a fine gentleman
who gave me a job when i was in need. i have repaid him with ingratitude. i am a wretch.
there is nothing more to be said no?
look here jose said rudy maybe you know something about those flowers on jody's
desk. jose nodded. yes he said but it is what you call it a secret. i have bought the flowers
this afternoon and sent them to mister simmons. well you damn fool said rudy how's he
going to know you sent them if you didn't put any name on them?
jose said that is not a matter for discussion. the important thing is that mr. simmons
he receives the flowers. flowers are beautiful. mister simmons is a gentleman and he
will enjoy them. that he should know where they came from that is quite beside the
point. i know that i have expressed my gratitude with something beautiful. i know that i
have tried to repay him for the splendid things he has done for me. it is not important that
mr. simmons he should know it. it is only important that he should receive the roses yes?
jose put on his coat and walked out of the bakery and nobody ever saw him again.
next day he didn't show up for his check. instead jody simmons received through the
mail a money order from jose for nineteen dollars and eighty-seven cents which with his
pay-check would pay for the pies . . .
it seemed that jose was standing in front of him now weaving back and forth in a
kind of fog. he was talking to jose. he was saying how is everything with you jose how
are you doing? talk right up jose and tell me about how you are doing and how you ever
came out with that rich girl. talk louder jose because i don't seem to be hearing so well
lately. real loud jose. and come up close because i can't move much. later on yes but
right now you see i'm in bed. how's that jose how's that?
jose!
wait a minute wait a minute jose. excuse me. you see i thought we were all in the
bakery together again. i thought we were all there. but we're not. i must have been
asleep. i must have been dreaming. it's so hard to tell. just a minute jose and i'll wake up.
there there. that's better much better. i don't know where you are jose but i know where
i am all right.
i know where i am.
chapter 7
he had to stop this. he had to stop things from fading away and then rushing back at him.
he had to stop the smotherings and the sinkings and the risings. he had to stop the fear
that made him want to yell and holler and laugh and claw himself to death with a pair of
hands that were rotting in some hospital dump.
he had to get hold of himself so he could think. this had been going on too long. his
stumps were healed over now. the bandages were gone. that meant time had passed. a
lot of time. enough time so that he had to come out of it and think. he had to think of
himself of joe bonham and what he was going to do next. he had to figure things out all
over again.
it was like a full grown man suddenly being stuffed back into his mother's body. he
was lying in stillness. he was completely helpless. somewhere sticking in his stomach
was a tube they fed him through. that was exactly like the womb except a baby in its
mother's body could look forward to the time when it would live.
he would be in this womb forever and ever and ever. he must remember that. he
must never expect or hope for anything different. this was his life from now on every
day and every hour and every minute of it. he would never again be able to say hello
how are you i love you. he would never again be able to hear music or the whisper of the
wind through trees or the chuckle of running water. he would never again breathe in the
smell of a steak frying in his mother's kitchen or the dampness of spring in the air or the
wonderful fragrance of sagebrush carried on the wind across a wide open plain. he would
never again be able to see the faces of people who made you glad just to look at them of
people like kareen. he would never again be able to see sunlight or the stars or the little
grasses that grow on a colorado hillside.
he would never walk with his legs on the ground. he would never run or jump or
stretch out when he was tired. he would never be tired.
if the place in which he lay were burning he would simply stay there and let it burn.
he would burn up with it and not be able to make a move. if he should feel an insect
crawling over the stump of body that remained he could not move one finger to destroy
it. if it stung him he could do nothing to ease the itch except maybe to writhe a little
against his covers. and this life wouldn't last only today or tomorrow or until the end of
next week. he was in his womb forever. it wasn't any dream. it was real.
he wondered how he could have come through it alive. you heard about somebody
scratching his thumb and the next thing you knew he was dead. the mountain climber
fell off the front stoop and fractured his skull and died by thursday. your best friend went
to the hospital to have his appendix taken out and four or five days later you were
standing beside his grave. a little germ like influenza carried off five maybe ten million
people in a single winter. then how could a guy lose his arms and legs and ears and eyes
and nose and mouth and still be alive? how did you make any sense out of it?
still there were plenty of people who had lost just their legs or just their arms and
were living. so maybe it was reasonable to think that a man could live all right if he lost
both his legs and his arms. if one was possible probably both were possible. the doctors
were getting pretty smart especially now that they had had three or four years in the army
with plenty of raw material to experiment on. if they got to you quickly enough so you
didn't bleed to death they could save you from almost any kind of injury. evidently they
had got to him quickly enough.
it was fairly reasonable when you thought of it. plenty guys had their hearing
smashed from concussion. nothing unusual about that. lots of guys had been blinded.
you even read in the papers once in a while about somebody trying to put a bullet
through his temple and ending up healthy except he was blind. so his blindness made
sense too. there were plenty guys in hospitals back of the lines who were breathing
through tubes and plenty without chins and plenty without noses. the whole thing made
sense. only he had combined them all. the shell had simply scooped out his whole face
and the doctors had got to him soon enough to keep him from bleeding to death. just a
nice clean slice of the shell that somehow missed his jugular vein and his spine.
things had been pretty quiet for a while just before he got his. that meant the
doctors in back of the lines had more time to play with him than during an offensive
when guys were being brought in by the truckload. that must be it. they had picked him
up quickly and hauled him back to a base hospital and all of them had rolled up their
sleeves and rubbed their hands together and said well boys here's a very interesting
problem let's see what we can do. after all they'd only carved up ten thousand guys back
there learning how. now they had come upon something that was a challenge and they
had plenty of time so they fixed him up and tucked him back into the womb.
but why hadn't he bled to death? you'd think that with the stumps of two arms and
two legs spouting blood a man could at least die. there were some mighty big veins in
your legs and arms. he'd seen guys bleed to death from losing just an arm. it didn't seem
reasonable the doctors could work fast enough to stop all four flows at once before a man
died. then he thought maybe i was only wounded in them just wounded a little and they
were cut off later maybe to save trouble or maybe because they were infected. he remembered
stories of gangrene and of soldiers found with their wounds filled with
maggots. that was a very good sign. if you had a bullet in your stomach and, a hole was
squirming alive with maggots then you were all right because the maggots ate away the
pus and kept the wound clean. but if you had the same hole and no maggots you simply
festered for a while and then you had gangrene.
perhaps he had had no maggots. maybe if he had been able to scare up just a handful
of little white worms he might right now have legs and arms. just a handful of little white
worms. perhaps when he had been picked up he still had his legs and arms with only a
few wounds in them. but by the time they got the important things like his eyes and nose
and ears and mouth fixed up the gangrene had started in his legs and arms. then they
started hacking. a toe here a wrist joint there oh hell let's take it off at the hip. that was
probably the way. when doctors are only chopping things off they have ways of stopping
the blood so that a man doesn't necessarily die from loss of it. maybe if the doctors had
known how he would end up they would have let him die. but it happened gradually joint
by joint and so here he was alive and they couldn't kill him now because that would be
murder.
oh hell there were a lot of funny things happened in this man's war. anything could
be true. you heard about them all the time. one guy had the whole top of his stomach
shot away so they took skin and meat from a dead man and they made a flap over the first
guy's stomach. they could lift the flap like a window and watch him digest his food.
there were whole rooms filled with men who breathed through tubes and other wards
where men ate through tubes and would eat through them the rest of their lives. tubes
were important. lots of guys would piss through tubes as long as they lived and there
were plenty who had had their rear ends shot off. now their bowels were connected up
with holes in their sides or stomachs. the holes were covered with absorbent bandages
because they had no muscles there to control themselves.
and that wasn't all. there was a place in southern france where they kept the crazy
ones. there were guys who couldn't talk even though they were in perfect shape. they
had just got scared and had forgotten how to talk. there were healthy able bodied men
who ran around on all fours and stuck their heads in corners when they were frightened
and smelled each other and lifted their legs like dogs and couldn't do anything but
whimper. there was a guy a coal miner went back to his wife and three kids in cardiff.
his face had been burned off by a flare one night and when his wife saw him she let out a
screech and grabbed a hatchet and chopped his head off and then killed the three kids.
they found her drinking beer just as cool as a cucumber down in a saloon that same
night. only thing was she was trying to eat the glass the beer came in. how could you
believe or disbelieve anything any more? four maybe five million men killed and none of
them wanting to die while hundreds maybe thousands were left crazy or blind or crippled
and couldn't die no matter how hard they tried.
but there weren't many like him. there weren't many guys the doctors could point to
and say here is the last word here is our triumph here is the greatest thing we ever did and
we did plenty. here is a man without legs or arms or ears or eyes or nose or mouth who
breathes and eats and is just as alive as you or me. the war had been a wonderful thing
for the doctors and he was the lucky guy who had profited by everything they learned.
but there was one thing they couldn't do. they might be perfectly able to put a guy back
into the womb but they couldn't get him out again. he was there for good. all the parts
that were gone from him were gone forever. that was the thing he must remember. that
was the thing he must try to believe. when that sank in he could calm down and think.
it was like reading hi the paper that someone has won a lottery and saying to yourself
there's a guy who won a million to one shot. you never quite believed that a man could
win against such odds yet you knew he had. certainly you never expected to win yourself
even if you bought a ticket. now he was just the reverse. he had lost a million to one
shot. yet if he read about himself in a newspaper he wouldn't be able to believe it even
though he knew it was true. and he would never expect it to happen to him. nobody
expected it. but he could believe anything from now on out. a million to one ten million
to one there was always the one. and he was it. he was the guy who had lost.
he was beginning to quiet down now. his thoughts were coming through a little
clearer a little more connectedly. he could lie here against his sheet and put things
together. he could figure out the small things that were wrong with him in addition to the
great. down somewhere near the base of his throat there was a scab that was sticking to
something. by tossing his head slightly to the right and then to the left he could feel the
pull of the scab. he could also feel a little tug at his forehead as if a cord had been tied
around there halfway between his eye sockets and his hairline. he began to puzzle about
the cord and why it pulled when he tossed his head to get the feel of the scab near his
neck. in the hole which was the middle of face he could feel nothing so it made a nice
little problem. he lay there tossing to the right tossing to the left feeling the pressure and
feeling the scab pull. then he got it.
they had put a mask over his face and it was tied at the top around his forehead. the
mask was evidently some sort of soft cloth and the lower part of it had stuck to the raw
mucus of his face wound. that explained the whole thing. the mask was just a square of
cloth tied securely and pulled down toward his throat so that the nurse in her comings and
goings wouldn't vomit at the sight of her patient. it was a very thoughtful arrangement.
now that he understood the purpose and mechanics of the mask the scab became an
irritation instead of merely a curious thing. even when he was a kid he could never let a
scab quite heal over. he was always picking at it. now he was picking at this scab by
tossing his head and drawing the mask tight. but he couldn't dislodge the mask or start
the scab to peeling. the task became a kind of mania with him. the place where the cloth
stuck to the scab didn't hurt. it wasn't that. but the whole thing was an annoyance and a
challenge and an issue of strength. if he could dislodge the mask then he was not
completely helpless.
he tried to stretch his neck so he could rip the cloth from the flesh. but he couldn't
stretch far enough. he found himself concentrating all his energy and all his mind on that
tiny point of irritation. and then tug by tug he realized he would never be able to dislodge
it. just so small a thing as a piece of cloth stuck to his skin yet all the muscles of his body
and all the power of his brain couldn't budge it. that was worse than being in the womb.
babies sometimes kicked. they sometimes turned over in their dark silent watery resting
places. but he had no legs to kick with and no arms to thrash with and he couldn't turn
over because he had no leverage in his body to start him rolling. he tried to shift his
weight from side to side but the muscles in what was left of his thighs wouldn't flex
properly and his shoulders were cut down so narrowly that they weren't any good either.
he abandoned the scab and the mask and began to scheme about turning over. he
could produce a faint rocking motion but nothing more. perhaps with practice he might
increase the strength of his back and thighs and shoulders. perhaps after one or five or
twenty years he could develop such strength that the circle of his rocking would become
wider and wider and wider. and then one day flip-flop and he'd be turned over. if he
could do this he might be able to kill himself because if the tubes which fed his lungs and
stomach were of metal the weight of his body might plunge the metal into some vital
organ. or if they were soft like rubber his weight would shut them off and he would
suffocate.
but all he could get out of his most violent efforts was that faint rocking motion and
even to produce that made him wet with sweat and dizzy from pain. he was twenty years
old and he couldn't even summon enough strength to turn over in bed. he had never been
sick a day in his life. he had always been strong. he had been able to lift a box packed
with sixty loaves of bread with each loaf weighing a pound and a half. he had been able
to throw such a box over his shoulder and on top of a seven foot route bin without even
thinking of it. he had been able to do this not only once but hundreds of times each night
until his shoulders and biceps were hard as iron. and now he could only flex his thighs
weakly and make a little rolling motion like a child rocking itself to sleep.
suddenly he was very tired. he lay back quietly and thought about that other that
minor injury he had begun to notice. there was a hole in his side. it was just a small hole
but evidently it wouldn't heal. his legs and arms were healed and that took a lot of time.
but during all that time of healing during all those weeks or months when he had been
fainting in and out of things the hole in his side had remained open. he had been noticing
it little by little for a long while and now he could feel it plainly. it was a patch of
moisture inside a bandage and from it moisture was slipping down his left side in a slick
little trail.
he remembered the time he visited jim tift at the military hospital in lille. jim had
been put in a ward where there were a lot of guys who had holes here and there that
wouldn't heal. some of them had been lying there draining and stinking for months. the
smell of that ward when you hit it was like the smell of a corpse you stumble over on
patrol duty like the smell of a rich ripe corpse that falls open at the touch of a boot and
sends up a stench of dead flesh like a cloud of gas.
maybe he was lucky his nose was shot off. it would be pretty bad to have to lie and
smell the perfume of your own body as it rotted away. maybe he was a lucky guy after all
because with a smell like that constantly in your nose you wouldn't have much of an
appetite. but then that wouldn't bother him anyhow. he ate regular. he could feel them
sliding stuff into his belly and he knew he was eating all right. flavor didn't matter to
him.
things were getting dimmer and dimmer now. he knew he wasn't fainting again. he
was slipping away. it seemed that the blackness in his eyes was changing to something
purple something like twilight blue. he was resting. he was simply lying back after a lot
of thinking and hard work and saying let it run let it fester because i can't smell it
anyhow. when you have so little left why should you care if part of it is dying? you lie
back. the darkness changes to another shade of darkness. starless twilight and starless
night. like at home. like at home in the evenings with crickets and frogs and a cow
lowing somewhere and a dog barking way off and the sounds of children playing.
wonderful beautiful sounds and darkness and peace and sleep. only no stars.
the rat came crawling over him stealthily. it came with its sharp little claws up his
left leg. it was a great brown trench rat like the ones they used to throw shovels at. it
came crawling and sniffing and smelling and tearing away at the bandage over his side.
he could feel its whiskers as they tickled the edges of the draining wound. he could feel
its long whiskers as they trailed in the pus from the hole. and there was nothing he could
do about it.
he remembered the face of a prussian officer they discovered one day. they had just
stormed the outer trenches of the german position. it was a trench that had been
abandoned a week maybe two weeks before. they all swarmed into it a whole company
on their way forward. there they came upon the prussian officer. he was a captain. he
was lying with one leg straight up in the air. the leg was swelled so much the pants
looked as if they were ready to bust open. his face was swelled too. his moustache was
still waxed. sitting on his neck and chewing away at his face was a fat contented rat. as
they came jumping over into the trench they got the whole picture. the entrance to a
dugout toward which the prussian had been heading when he was hit. the prussian with
his leg up in the air. the rat chewing.
somebody let out a yell and then they were all yelling like crazy men. the rat sat up
and looked at them. then the rat started for the dugout entrance. but he started too slow.
yelling and screaming the whole pack of them were after him. somebody ripped off a
helmet and it hit the rat in its hindquarters. the rat squealed and turned to snap at the
helmet. then it dragged itself into the dugout with all of them after it. they caught it
there in the dim light and beat it into red jelly. then they were all still for a second. they
felt kind of foolish. they left the dugout and went on with the war.
he thought about it afterward. it didn't matter whether the rat was gnawing on your
buddy or a damned german it was all the same. your real enemy was the rat and when
you saw it there fat and well fed chewing on something that might be you why you went
nuts.
the rat was eating on him now. he could feel its sharp little teeth as they bit into the
edge of the wound and then he could feel the quick little movements through the rat's
body as it chewed. then it would dig its feet in and scoop out a bit more of flesh and that
would hurt and then it would chew again.
he wondered where the nurse was. it was a hell of a hospital where they let rats
come right into the wards and chew the customers while they were trying to get some
sleep. he wiggled and twisted but the rat hung on tight. there wasn't anything he could
do to scare it. he couldn't hit it or kick at it and he couldn't yell or whistle to frighten it.
the only thing he could do was to go into that slow rocking motion. but the rat evidently
liked that because it stayed right where it was. the rat was eating very carefully now
taking only the choicest parts and then squatting flat on its stomach with its little jaws
chewing chewing chewing.
he began to realize that the chewing of the rat was not a thing that would last only
for ten or fifteen minutes. rats were smart animals. they knew their way around. this
one wouldn't be content to go away and not come back again. it would return from day to
day and from night to night to feed at his carcass until he went crazy. he found himself
running through the corridors of the hospital. he found himself coming upon a nurse and
grabbing her by the throat and putting her head down to the hole in his side where the rat
was still clinging and hollering at her you lazy slut why don't you come and chase the rats
off your customers? he was running through the night shrieking. running through a
whole series of nights running through an eternity of nights yelling for christ sake
somebody take this rat off me see him hanging there? running through a lifetime of
nights and shrieking and trying to push the rat off and feeling the rat sink its teeth deeper
and deeper.
when he had run without legs until he was tired and when he had screamed without
voice until his throat hurt he fell back into the womb back into the quietude back into the
loneliness and the blackness and the terrible silence.
chapter 8
the nurse's hands were on him. he could feel her washing his body and manipulating his
flesh and dressing the wound in his side. she used something warm and greasy to
dissolve the scab substance that held the mask to that point of irritation near his throat.
he felt like a child that has awakened weeping from a nightmare to find itself safe and
snug in its mother's arms. the nurse was company even though he couldn't see or hear
her. she was somebody and she was his friend. he wasn't alone any longer. with her at
hand there was no need for him to worry no need for him to struggle no need for him to
think. the responsibility was completely hers and he had nothing to fear so long as she
was close to him. instead of the rat gnawing at his side he felt her cool fingers and the
cleanliness of new bandages and fresh linen.
he knew now that the rat had been only a dream. he was so relieved to discover this
that for a few minutes he almost forgot his fear. and then relaxing under the nurse's care
he suddenly chilled all over at realization that the rat dream might come again. it was
almost a certainty to come again. he knew that the whole dream was started by his
thinking of the wound in his side. his awareness of the wound as he fell asleep brought
on the dream of the rat feeding at it. since the wound remained it seemed almost certain
that the same chain of thought would bring the rat back to him again in his sleep. each
time he fell asleep the rat would come and sleep instead of being forgetfulness would
become as bad as being awake. a guy could stand a lot when he was awake. but when
sleep came he deserved to forget everything. sleep should be like death.
he knew the rat was a dream. he was sure of that. all he had to do was to find some
way of getting himself out of the dream when it came. he could remember when he was a
kid he used to have nightmares. funny thing about them was they weren't particularly
awful ones either. the worst one was where he seemed to be an ant walking across a
sidewalk and the sidewalk was so big and he was so small that sometimes he awakened
yelling he was so scared. that was the way to stop nightmares by yelling so hard you
waked yourself up. but hell that wouldn't work for him now. in the first place he couldn't
yell and in the second place he was so deaf he couldn't hear the noise anyhow. that was
no good. he would have to find some other way.
he remembered that as he got older and different nightmares came he used to be able
to think himself out of them. just when it seemed the awful thing that was after him was
going to get him he could think in his sleep here loe this is just a dream. it's just a dream
joe understand? and then in a little bit he would open his eyes and look into the darkness
around him and the dream would be gone. that system might work with the rat. instead
of imagining himself running and yelling for help the next time the rat came he would
just think to himself this is a dream. and then he would open—
but that wouldn't work. he couldn't open his eyes. in his sleep in the middle of the
rat dream he might think himself out of it but how would he be able to prove he was
awake if he couldn't open his eyes and look around into the darkness?
he thought jesus joe there must be some other way. he thought it's asking very little
for a man just to want to be able to prove that he's awake. he thought come on joe this is
the only way you can lick the rat and you've got to do that so you'd better figure out some
way quick to prove whether you're awake or asleep.
maybe he'd better start from the beginning. he was awake now. he was sure of that.
he had just felt the nurse's hands and the nurse's hands were real. so when he felt them
he was awake. even though the nurse was gone now he was still awake because he was
thinking about the rat dream. if you're thinking about a dream that's proof you're awake.
that's clear enough joe. you're awake. and you're trying to get rid of a dream that will
come when you go to sleep. you can't wake yourself out of your sleep by yelling because
you can't yell. you can't think yourself out of it and then prove it's gone by opening your
eyes because you haven't got any eyes. better start hi before you go to sleep joe that's the
business start in right now.
the minute you feel sleepy like you're going to topple off why just kind of stiffen
yourself and tell yourself that you're not going to have any dreams about rats. then
maybe you'll be so ready for it that it won't come. because once it comes it's got you till
you wake up and you can't be sure that you're awake until you feel the nurse's hands. you
can't be absolutely sure till then. so when you feel like you're getting sleepy you just
think hard that you're not going to dream about the—
hold on there. how're you going to know when you begin to feel sleepy joe? what's
going to tell you that you're sleepy? just how does a guy feel before he topples off to
sleep? well maybe he's all tired out from working and he just relaxes in bed and the first
thing he knows he's asleep. but that's no good for you joe because you never get that
tired and you're in bed all the time. that's no good. well then maybe his eyes burn a little
and he yawns and stretches and finally his lids drop down. but that's no good either. your
eyes don't ever burn and you can't yawn and stretch and you've got no eyelids. you're
never tired joe. you don't need any sleep because you're practically sleeping all the time.
so how can you get sleepy? if you can't get sleepy you've got no warning. and if you've
got no warning you can't stiffen yourself in advance against the rat.
jesus he was in an awful mess. he was in an awful mess if he couldn't even tell
whether he was awake or asleep. but there wasn't any way to tell he could think of. when
you're going to sleep you're tired and you lie down and you close your eyes and sound
dies away and then you're asleep. maybe even a normal guy a guy with eyes to close and
ears to hear with can't tell the actual minute he falls asleep. maybe nobody can. there's a
little space between being awake and being asleep that isn't either one. the two things
just melt together so that without knowing it you're asleep. and then without realizing
that you're waking up all of a sudden you're awake.
it was a hell of a thing. if even a normal guy couldn't tell how was he going to tell
when everything about him was like sleep all the time twenty four hours a day? for all he
knew he might be slipping in and out of sleep every five minutes or so. his whole life
was so much like sleep that he had no way of keeping track. of course it stood to reason
that he was awake a lot of the time. but the only time he could be positive he was awake
was when he felt the nurse's hands. and now that he knew the rat was a dream and since
it was the only dream he could absolutely tie down why the only time he could be sure he
was asleep was when the rat was gnawing. of course he might have other dreams beside
the rat just as he might be awake lots of times when the nurse's hands weren't touching
him. but how in the hell could he tell?
for example when he was a kid he used to day dream. he used to sit back and think
of things he'd do some day. or he used to think of things he did last week. but all the time
he would be awake. he knew that. yet with him lying here in bed in blackness and
silence it was different. in thinking over something that happened a long while ago what
seemed like a day dream might become a real dream so that as he thought of the past he
fell asleep and dreamed about it.
maybe there wasn't any way. maybe for the rest of his life he would just have to
guess whether he was awake or asleep. how was he ever going to be able to say well i
guess i'll go to sleep now or i just woke up? how was he going to know? and a guy had
to know. that was important. it was the most important thing left. all he had was a mind
and he would like to feel that it was thinking clearly. but how was he going to do it
except when there was a nurse at hand or a rat on him?
he had to do it that was all. guys were supposed to develop extra powers when they
lost parts of themselves. maybe if he concentrated on thinking he would know he was
awake just like he knew he was awake now. then when he stopped concentrating he
would know he was going to fall asleep. that meant no more dreaming about the past.
that meant no more of anything but thinking thinking thinking. then he'd get so tired of
thinking that he'd be drowsy and he'd fall asleep. he had a mind left by god and that was
all. it was the only thing he could use so he must use it every minute he was awake. he
must think till he was tired tireder than he had ever been before. he must think all the
time and then he must sleep.
he saw he had to do it. because if he couldn't tell being awake from being asleep
why he couldn't even consider himself a grown-up person. it was bad enough to be shot
back into the womb. it was bad enough to think of going on for years and years in
loneliness and silence and blackness. but this latest thing his inability to tell dreams from
thoughts was oblivion. it made him nothing and less than nothing. it robbed him of the
only thing that distinguished a normal person from a crazy man. it meant that he might be
lying and thinking very solemnly about something that seemed important while all the
time he might really be asleep and dreaming the idiotic dreams of a two year old. it
robbed him of any respect for his own thoughts and that was the worst thing that could
happen to anybody. he was so mixed up that he wasn't sure whether the nurse or the rat
was real. maybe neither was real. maybe both were real. maybe nothing was real not
even himself oh god and wouldn't that be wonderful.
chapter 9
the campfire was built in front of a tent and the tent was under an enormous pine. when
you slept inside the tent it seemed always that it was raining outside because the needles
from the pine kept falling. sitting across from him and staring into the fire was ms father.
each summer they came to this place which was nine thousand feet high and covered
with pine trees and dotted with lakes. they fished in the lakes and when they slept at
night the roar of water from the streams which connected the lakes sounded in their ears
all night long.
they had been coming to this place ever since he was seven. now he was fifteen and
bill harper was going to come tomorrow. he sat in front of the fire and looked across at
his father and wondered just how he was going to tell him. it was a very serious thing.
tomorrow for the first time in all their trips together he wanted to go fishing with
someone other than his father. on previous trips the idea had never occurred to him. his
father had always preferred his company to that of men and he had always preferred his
father's company to that of the other guys. but now bill harper was coming up tomorrow
and he wanted to go fishing with him. he knew it was something that had to happen
sometime. yet he also knew that it was the end of something. it was an ending and a
beginning and he wondered just how he should tell his father about it.
so he told him very casually. he said bill harper's coming up tomorrow and i
thought maybe i'd go out with him. he said bill harper doesn't know very much about
fishing and i do so i think if you don't mind i'll get up early in the morning and meet
harper and he and i will go fishing.
for a little while his father didn't say a thing. then he said why sure go along joe.
and then a little later his father said has bill harper got a rod? he told his father no bill
hasn't a rod. well said his father why don't you take my rod and let bill use yours? i don't
want to go fishing tomorrow anyhow. i'm tired and i think i'll rest all day. so you use my
rod and let bill use yours.
it was as simple as that and yet he knew it was a great thing. his father's rod was a
very valuable one. it was perhaps the only extravagance his father had had in his whole
life. it had amber leaders and beautiful silk windings. each spring his father sent the rod
away to a man in colorado springs who was an expert on rods. the man in colorado
springs carefully scraped the varnish off the rod and rewound it and revarnished it and it
came back glistening new each year. there was nothing his father treasured more. he felt
a little lump in his throat as he thought that even as he was deserting his father for bill
harper his father had volunteered the rod.
they went to sleep that night in the bed which lay against a floor of pine needles.
they had scooped the needles out to make a little hollow place for their hips. he lay
awake quite a while thinking about tomorrow and his father who slept beside him. then
he fell asleep. at six o'clock bill harper whispered to him through the tent flap. he got
up and gave bill his rod and took his father's for himself and they went off without
awakening his father.
it was growing dark when the terrible thing happened. they were in a rowboat
trolling with spinners. they had both lines out. he was rowing and bill harper was at the
stern sitting down facing him and holding a rod out on each side of the boat. it was very
quiet and the lake was glassy still. they were both feeling a little dreamy because they
had had such a wonderful time all day. then there was a sharp whirring sound as the fish
struck. the rod leaped out of bill harper's hand and disappeared into the water. both of
them made wild grabs for it but they were too late. it was his father's rod. they fished
around for more than an hour with the other rod and with the oars of the boat hoping to
raise it but they knew all the while there was no chance. his father's wonderful rod was
gone and they would never see it again.
they beached the boat and cleaned the fish they had caught and then they went over
to the general store for a root beer. they drank their root beer and talked in hushed tones
about the rod. then he left bill harper.
all the way to the tent walking under pine trees and over soft needle carpets and
hearing the sound of the streams rushing down the mountain and seeing the stars in the
sky he thought about his father. his father and mother never had much money but they
seemed to get along all right. they had a little house set far back on a long wide lot near
the edge of town. in front of the house there was a space of lawn and between the lawn
and the sidewalk his father had a lot of room for gardening. people would come from all
over town to admire his father's garden. his father would get up at five or five-thirty in
the mornings to go out and irrigate the garden. he would come home from work in the
evenings eager to return to it. the garden in a way was his father's escape from bills and
success stories and the job at the store. it was his father's way of creating something. it
was his father's way of being an artist.
at first they had lettuce and beans and peas and carrots and onions and beets and
radishes. then his father got consent from the man who owned the vacant lot next door to
use the lot for gardening space also. the man was glad enough to have his father use it
because it would save him the expense of burning the weeds off in the fall. so on the
vacant lot his father raised sweet corn and summer squash and cantaloupes and
watermelons and cucumbers. he had a great hedge of sunflowers around it. the
sunflower hearts were sometimes a foot across. the seeds made fine food for the
chickens. in a little patch that had shade half the day his father planted everbearing
strawberries so they had fresh berries from spring until late fall.
in back of the house in shale city they had chickens and rabbits and he had some
bantams for pets. two maybe three times a week they had fried chicken for dinner and it
didn't seem like a luxury. in the winter they had stewing hens with dumplings and
potatoes from their own vines. during the season when the chickens laid a lot of eggs and
eggs were cheap at the store his mother took the extra eggs from the henhouse and put
them up in big crocks of waterglass. then when winter came and eggs were expensive
and the hens weren't laying she just went down into the cellar and got her eggs for
nothing. they kept a cow and his mother churned their own butter and they had buttermilk.
the milk set in pans on the back porch and in the morning the milk from the night
before was covered with yellow cream almost as heavy as leather. on hot summer
sundays they made ice cream using their own cream and their own strawberries and
practically everything else their own except the ice.
on the far side of the vacant lot his father had six stands of bees so that every fall
they had plenty of honey. his father would go out to the bee stands and pull out the
sections and check on the cells and if the stand was weak he would destroy all the queen
cells and perhaps even clip the queen's wings so that she wouldn't swarm and split the
hive.
as soon as the weather got below freezing his father went out to some nearby
farmer's and bought fresh meat. there would be a quarter of beef and maybe half a hog
hanging on the back porch frozen through and always fresh. when you wanted a steak
you simply took a saw and you sawed the steak off and besides being better it didn't cost
you anything like the butcher shops charged.
in the fall his mother spent weeks canning fruit. by the end of the season the cellar
was packed. you would go down there and beside the great crocks of water-glassed eggs
there would be mason jars of every kind of fruit you could want. there would be apricot
preserves and orange marmalade and raspberry jam and blueberry jam and apple jelly.
there would be hard-boiled eggs canned in beet juice and bread and butter pickles and
salted cherries and chili sauce. if you went down in october you would find three or four
heavy fruit cakes black and moist and filled with citron and nuts. they would be in the
coolest corner of the cellar and they would be carefully wrapped with damp cloths against
the christmas season.
all of these things they had and yet his father was a failure. his father couldn't make
any money. sometimes his father and mother talked together in the evenings about it. soand-so
had gone to california and had made a lot of money in real estate. so-and-so had
gone and made a lot of money just by working in a chain shoe store until he got to be
manager. everybody who went to california made money and was a success. but his
father in shale city was a failure.
it was hard to understand how his father could be such a big failure when you
stopped to think about the thing. he was a good man and an honest man. he kept his
children together and they ate good food fine food rich food better food than people ate hi
the cities. even rich people in the cities couldn't get vegetables as fresh or as crisp. they
couldn't get meat as well cured. no amount of money could buy that. those things you
had to raise for yourself. his father had managed to do it even to the honey they used on
the hot biscuits his mother made. his father had managed to produce all these things on
two city lots and yet his father was a failure.
he saw the tent rising ahead of him out of the mountainside like a small white cloud
in the darkness. he thought about the rod again and then he knew why his father was a
failure. it wasn't that his father didn't provide for his family and keep them in clothes and
food and pleasures. it was all very plain now. his father didn't have enough money to buy
another rod. even though the rod was his father's most cherished possession now that it
was gone he wouldn't have enough money to buy another and so he was a failure.
when he got to the tent his father was in bed and asleep. he stood for a minute
looking down at his father. then he went out and strung up his fish. he returned to the
tent and undressed quickly and got into bed beside his father. his father stirred. he knew
it was no good waiting till morning. he had to tell his father now. his voice wouldn't
come clearly when he began to talk. it wasn't because he was afraid of what his father
might say. it was because he knew that his father would never again be able to have a rod
as good as the one that was gone.
dad he said we lost your rod. we got a quick strike and before we knew it the rod
was in the water. we hunted around for it and fished with the oars but we didn't get it so
it's lost.
it seemed like maybe five minutes before his father made a sound. then he turned
slightly over in bed. he felt his father's arm suddenly thrown over his chest. he felt its
warm comforting pressure. well said his father i don't think we should let a little thing
like a fishing rod spoil our last trip together should we?
there was nothing to say so he just lay still. his father had known all along that it
was really their last trip together. from now on in the summers he would come up
camping with guys like bill harper and glen hogan and the rest of them. and his father
would come on fishing trips with men. it had just happened that way. it had to happen
that way. but he lay there in bed beside his father with the two of them jack-knifed
together in the way they always slept best and his father's arm around him and he blinked
back the tears. he and his father had lost everything. themselves and the rod.
he awakened thinking of his father and wondering where the nurse was. he
awakened lonelier than he had been since he could remember. he was lonely for shale
city and its pleasant ways. he was lonely for one look for one smell for one taste for one
word that would bring shale city and his father and his mother and his sisters back to
him. but he was so cut off from them that even if they were standing beside his bed they
would be as distant as if they were ten thousand miles away.
chapter 10
lying on your back without anything to do and anywhere to go was kind of like being on
a high hill far away from noise and people. it was like being on a camping trip all by
yourself. you had plenty of time to think. you had time to figure things out. things you'd
never thought of before. things like for example going to war. you were so completely
alone on your hill that noise and people didn't enter in your figuring of things at all. you
figured only for yourself without considering a single little thing outside yourself. it
seemed that you thought clearer and that your answers made more sense. and even if
they didn't make sense it didn't matter because you weren't ever going to be able to do
anything about them anyhow.
he thought here you are joe bonham lying like a side of beef all the rest of your life
and for what? somebody tapped you on the shoulder and said come along son we're
going to war. so you went. but why? in any other deal even like buying a car or running
an errand you had the right to say what's there in it for me? otherwise you'd be buying
bad cars for too much money or running errands for fools and starving to death. it was a
kind of duty you owed yourself that when anybody said come on son do this or do that
you should stand up and say look mister why should i do this for who am i doing it and
what am i going to get out of it in the end? but when a guy comes along and says here
come with me and risk your life and maybe die or be crippled why then you've got no
rights. you haven't even the right to say yes or no or i'll think it over. there are plenty of
laws to protect guys' money even in war time but there's nothing on the books says a
man's life's his own.
of course a lot of guys were ashamed. somebody said let's go out and fight for
liberty and so they went and got killed without ever once thinking about liberty. and what
kind of liberty were they fighting for anyway? how much liberty and whose idea of
liberty? were they fighting for the liberty of eating free ice cream cones all their lives or
for the liberty of robbing anybody they pleased whenever they wanted to or what? you
tell a man he can't rob and you take away some of his liberty. you've got to. what the hell
does liberty mean anyhow? it's just a word like house or table or any other word. only it's
a special kind of word. a guy says house and he can point to a house to prove it. but a
guy says come on let's fight for liberty and he can't show you liberty. he can't prove the
thing he's talking about so how in the hell can he be telling you to fight for it?
no sir anybody who went out and got into the front line trenches to fight for liberty
was a gooddam fool and the guy who got him there was a liar. next time anybody came
gabbling to him about liberty—what did he mean next time? there wasn't going to be any
next time for him. but the hell with that. if there could be a next time and somebody said
let's fight for liberty he would say mister my life is important. i'm not a fool and when i
swap my life for liberty i've got to know in advance what liberty is and whose idea of
liberty we're talking about and just how much of that liberty we're going to have. and
what's more mister are you as much interested in this liberty as you want me to be? and
maybe too much liberty will be as bad as too little liberty and i think you're a goddam
fourflusher talking through your hat and i've already decided that i like the liberty i've got
right here the liberty to walk and see and hear and talk and eat and sleep with my girl. i
think i like that liberty better than fighting for a lot of things we won't get and ending up
without any liberty at all. ending up dead and rotting before my life is even begun good
or ending up like a side of beef. thank you mister. you fight for liberty. me i don't care
for some.
hell's fire guys had always been fighting for liberty. america fought a war for liberty
in 1776. lots of guys died. and in the end does america have any more liberty than
canada or australia who didn't fight at all? maybe so i'm not arguing i'm just asking. can
you look at a guy and say he's an american who fought for his liberty and anybody can
see he's a very different guy from a canadian who didn't? no by god you can't and that's
that. so maybe a lot of guys with wives and kids died in 1776 when they didn't need to
die at all. they're dead now anyway. sure but that doesn't do any good. a guy can think
of being dead a hundred years from now and he doesn't mind it. but to think of being
dead tomorrow morning and to be dead forever to be nothing but dust and stink in the
earth is that liberty?
they were always fighting for something the bastards and if anyone dared say the
hell with fighting it's all the same each war is like the other and nobody gets any good out
of it why they hollered coward. if they weren't fighting for liberty they were fighting for
independence or democracy or freedom or decency or honor or their native land or some
thing else that didn't mean anything. the war was to make the world safe for democracy
for the little countries for everybody. if the war was over now then the world must be all
safe for democracy. was it? and what kind of democracy? and how much? and whose?
then there was this freedom the little guys were always getting killed for. was it freedom
from another country? freedom from work or disease or death? freedom from your
mother-in-law? please mister give us a bill of sale on this freedom before we go out and
get killed. give us a bill of sale drawn up plainly so we know in advance what we're getting
killed for and give us also a first mortgage on something as security so we can be
sure after we've won your war that we've got the same kind of freedom we bargained for.
and take decency. everybody said america was fighting a war for the triumph of
decency. but whose idea of decency? and decency for who? speak up and tell us what
decency is. tell us how much better a decent dead man feels that an indecent live one.
make a comparison there in facts like houses and tables. make it in words we can understand.
and don't talk about honor. the honor of a chinese or an englishman or an african
negro or an american or a mexican? please all you guys who want to fight to preserve
our honor let us know what the hell honor is. is it american honor for the whole world
we're fighting for? maybe the world doesn't like it. maybe the south sea islanders like
their honor better.
for christ sake give us things to fight for we can see and feel and pin down and
understand. no more highfalutin words that mean nothing like native land. motherland
fatherland homeland native land. it's all the same. what the hell good to you is your
native land after you're dead? whose native land is it after you're dead? if you get killed
fighting for your native land you've bought a pig in a poke. you've paid for something
you'll never collect.
and when they couldn't hook the little guys into fighting for liberty or freedom or
democracy or independence or decency or honor they tried the women. look at the dirty
huns they would say look at them how they rape the beautiful french and belgian girls.
somebody's got to stop all that raping. so come on little guy join the army and save the
beautiful french and belgian girls. so the little guy got bewildered and he signed up and
in a little while a shell hit him and his life spattered out of him in red meat pulp and he
was dead. dead for another word and all the fierce old bats of the d.a.r. get out and
hurrah themselves hoarse over his grave because he died for womanhood.
now it might be that a guy would risk getting killed if his women were being raped.
but if he did why he was only striking a bargain. he was simply saying that according to
the way he felt at the time the safety of his women was worth more than his own life. but
there wasn't anything particularly noble or heroic about it. it was a straight deal his life
for something he valued more. it was more or less like any other deal a man might make.
but when you change your women to all the women in the world why you begin to
defend women in the bulk. to do that you have to fight in the bulk. and by that time
you're fighting for a word again.
when armies begin to move and flags wave and slogans pop up watch out little guy
because it's somebody else's chestnuts in the fire not yours. it's words you're fighting for
and you're not making an honest deal your life for something better. you're being noble
and after you're killed the thing you traded your life for won't do you any good and
chances are it won't do anybody else any good either.
maybe that's a bad way to think. there are lots of idealists around who will say have
we got so low that nothing is more precious than life? surely there are ideals worth
fighting for even dying for. if not then we are worse than the beasts of the field and have
sunk into barbarity. then you say that's all right let's be barbarous just so long as we don't
have war. you keep your ideals just as long as they don't cost me my life. and they say
but surely life isn't as important as principle. then you say oh no? maybe not yours but
mine is. what the hell is principle? name it and you can have it.
you can always hear the people who are willing to sacrifice somebody else's life.
they're plenty loud and they talk all the time. you can find them in churches and schools
and newspapers and legislatures and congress. that's their business. they sound
wonderful. death before dishonor. this ground sanctified by blood. these men who died
so gloriously. they shall not have died in vain. our noble dead. hmmmm.
but what do the dead say?
did anybody ever come back from the dead any single one of the millions who got
killed did any one of them ever come back and say by god i'm glad i'm dead because
death is always better than dishonor? did they say i'm glad i died to make the world safe
for democracy? did they say i like death better than losing liberty? did any of them ever
say it's good to think i got my guts blown out for the honor of my country? did any of
them ever say look at me i'm dead but i died for decency and that's better than being
alive? did any of them ever say here i am i've been rotting for two years in a foreign
grave but it's wonderful to die for your native land? did any of them say hurray i died for
womanhood and i'm happy see how i sing even though my mouth is choked with worms?
nobody but the dead know whether all these things people talk about are worth
dying for or not. and the dead can't talk. so the words about noble deaths and sacred
blood and honor and such are all put into dead lips by grave robbers and fakes who have
no right to speak for the dead. if a man says death before dishonor he is either a fool or a
liar because he doesn't know what death is. he isn't able to judge. he only knows about
living. he doesn't know anything about dying. if he is a fool and believes in death before
dishonor let him go ahead and die. but all the little guys who are too busy to fight should
be left alone. and all the guys who say death before dishonor is pure bull the important
thing is life before death they should be left alone too. because the guys who say life isn't
worth living without some principle so important you're willing to die for it they are all
nuts. and the guys who say you'll see there'll come a time you can't escape you're going
to have to fight and die because it'll mean your very life why they are also nuts. they are
talking like fools. they are saying that two and two make nothing. they are saying that a
man will have to die in order to protect his life. if you agree to fight you agree to die.
now if you die to protect your life you aren't alive anyhow so how is there any sense in a
thing like that? a man doesn't say i will starve myself to death to keep from starving. he
doesn't say i will spend all my money in order to save my money. he doesn't say i will
burn my house down in order to keep it from burning. why then should he be willing to
die for the privilege of living? there ought to be at least as much common sense about
living and dying as there is about going to the grocery store and buying a loaf of bread.
and all the guys who died all the five million or seven million or ten million who
went out and died to make the world safe for democracy to make the world safe for
words without meaning how did they feel about it just before they died? how did they
feel as they watched their blood pump out into the mud? how did they feel when the gas
hit their lungs and began eating them all away? how did they feel as they lay crazed in
hospitals and looked death straight in the face and saw him come and take them? if the
thing they were fighting for was important enough to die for then it was also important
enough for them to be thinking about it in the last minutes of their lives. that stood to
reason. life is awfully important so if you've given it away you'd ought to think with all
your mind in the last moments of your life about the thing you traded it for. so did all
those kids die thinking of democracy and freedom and liberty and honor and the safety of
the home and the stars and stripes forever?
you're goddam right they didn't.
they died crying in their minds like little babies. they forgot the thing they were
fighting for the things they were dying for. they thought about things a man can understand.
they died yearning for the face of a friend. they died whimpering for the voice of
a mother a father a wife a child. they died with their hearts, sick for one more look at the
place where they were born please god just one more look. they died moaning and
sighing for life. they knew what was important. they knew that life was everything and
they died with screams and sobs. they died with only one thought in their minds and that
was i want to live i want to live i want to live.
he ought to know.
he was the nearest thing to a dead man on earth.
he was a dead man with a mind that could still think. he knew all the answers that
the dead knew and couldn't think about. he could speak for the dead because he was one
of them. he was the first of all the soldiers who had died since the beginning of time who
still had a brain left to think with. nobody could dispute with him. nobody could prove
him wrong. because nobody knew but he.
he could tell all these high-talking murdering sonsof-bitches who screamed for
blood just how wrong they were. he could tell them mister there's nothing worth dying
for i know because i'm dead. there's no word worth your life. i would rather work in a
coal mine deep under the earth and never see sunlight and eat crusts and water and work
twenty hours a day. i would rather do that than be dead. i would trade democracy for life.
i would trade independence and honor and freedom and decency for life. i will give you
all these things and you give me the power to walk and see and hear and breathe the air
and taste my food. you take the words. give me back my life. i'm not asking for a happy
life now. i'm not asking for a decent life or an honorable life or a free life. i'm beyond
that. i'm dead so i'm simply asking for life. to live. to feel. to be something that moves
over the ground and isn't dead. i know what death is and all you people who talk about
dying for words don't even know what life is.
there's nothing noble about dying. not even if you die for honor. not even if you die
the greatest hero the world ever saw. not even if you're so great your name will never be
forgotten and who's that great? the most important thing is your life little guys. you're
worth nothing dead except for speeches. don left them kid you any more. pay no attention
when they tap you on the shoulder and say come along we've got to fight for
liberty or whatever their word is there's always a word.
just say mister i'm sorry i got no time to die i'm too busy and then turn and run like
hell. if they say coward why don't pay any attention because it's your job to live not to
die. if they talk about dying for principles that are bigger than life you say mister you're a
liar. nothing is bigger than life. there's nothing noble in death. what's noble about lying
in the ground and rotting? what's noble about never seeing the sunshine again? what's
noble about having your legs and arms blown off? what's noble about being an idiot?
what's noble about being blind and deaf and dumb? what's noble about being dead?
because when you're dead mister it's all over. it's the end. you're less than a dog less than
a rat less than a bee or an ant less than a white maggot crawling around on a dungheap.
you're dead mister and you died for nothing.
you're dead mister.
dead.
book ii
the living
chapter 11
two times two is four. four times four is sixteen. sixteen times sixteen is two hundred
and fifty-six. two hundred and fifty-six times two hundred and fifty-six is oh well that
was far enough anyhow. all right then two times three is six. six times six is thirty-six.
thirty-six times thirty-six is five hundred and seventy-six. five hundred and hell that
wasn't any good. that was as far as he could go.
that was the trouble with numbers. they got so big you couldn't handle them and
even if you could they got you nowhere. try something else. lie and lay. now i lay me
down to sleep. i lay these flowers on the table. i lie them on the table. i lie down to sleep.
he laid there for three hours. i lie this book down. what the hell why not put it down and
be done with it? who is there? whom is there? of whom to who of who to whom.
between you and i and the gatepost. between you and me. between us that's much better.
there's nobody like her. nobody like she. there's nobody like she is. there's nobody like
her is. nobody like her.
david copperfield had a tough time and was apprenticed to mr. micawber who
believed everything would turn out well. there was an aunt dorrity or something like
that. david ran away to her. his mother had big brown eyes and was gentle and barkis
was willing. the father was dead. old scrooge was tight and tiny tim said god bless us
all. there was a pudding round like a cannon ball with fire. tiny tim was a cripple. the
last of the mohicans was an iroquois. was he or wasn't he and where did leatherstocking
come in?
half a league half a league half a league onward. into the valley of death rode the six
hundred. noble six hundred. theirs not to reason why theirs but to do or die. nothing
more. when the frost is on the pumpkin and the fodder's in the shock when you hear the
ta-de-dum-dee of the ta-da turkey cock. no good. maybe something else.
there are eight planets. they are earth venus jupiter mars mercury. one two three
four five. three more. he didn't know. a star flickers and a planet has steady light. he
couldn't remember. thou shall not have any other gods before me. thou shalt not kill.
thou shalt honor thy father and mother. thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's ox nor his ass
nor his manservant nor his maidservant. thou shalt not steal. thou shalt not commit
adultery. not enough. blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth. blessed are
the poor for they shall see god. blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness
sake for they shall do something or other he couldn't remember. the lord is my shepherd
i shall not want. he leadeth me beside the green pastures. he leadeth me beside the cool
waters. he anointeth my head with oil. my cup runneth over. yea though i walk through
the valley of death i shall fear no evil for thy rod and thy buckler they comfort me. surely
goodness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life and i will dwell in the house
of the lord forever. that was pretty good. that was the best yet.
hell the trouble with him was he didn't know anything. he didn't know a thing. why
hadn't they taught him something he could remember? why didn't he have something to
think about? here he was with nothing to do but think and he didn't have anything to fall
back on. all he could remember was himself his life and that was bad. his mind was the
only thing he had left and he had to find something to use it for. only he couldn't use it
because he didn't know anything. he was ignorant as a baby when he really tried to think.
if he could remember a book chapter for chapter he could lie back and read it over
and over again in his mind. only he couldn't remember. he couldn't even remember the
plots much less the chapters. only a little bit here and a little bit there. it wasn't that he
had forgotten how to remember. it was just that he'd never paid any attention so he had
nothing worth remembering. he was a man he was alive he would be alive for a long
time and he had to have something to do something to think about. he had to start in like
a baby and learn. he had to concentrate. he had to start in at the beginning. he had to
start in with an idea.
the idea had been seeping into his mind for a long while just how long he didn't
know and the idea was this that the important thing is time. he remembered from ancient
history in the tenth grade that way way back even before christ the first men who began
to think were thinking of time. they studied the stars and figured out the week and the
month and the year so that there would be some way of measuring time. that was smart
of them because he was about in the same fix they were and he knew that time was the
most important thing in the world. it was the only real thing. it was everything.
if you can keep track of time you can get a hold on yourself and keep yourself in the
world but if you lose it why then you are lost too. the last thing that ties in with other
people is gone and you are all alone. he remembered how the count of monte cristo
when he was put into his dungeon down there in the darkness kept a record of time. he
remembered how robinson crusoe was very careful to keep track of time even though he
never had any appointments. no matter how far you are separated from other people if
you have an idea of time why then you are in the same world with them you are part of
them but if you lose time the others go on ahead of you and you are left alone hanging in
air lost to everything forever.
all he knew was that on a day in september in 1918 time stopped. there was a howl
somewhere and he dived into a dugout and things blotted out and he lost time. from that
instant to the present he might as well figure that there was a chunk of time he could
never regain. even if he discovered a way to check up on time from now on that which
was gone was lost forever and he would always be living behind the rest of the world
because of it. he could remember nothing after the explosion until he woke up and realized
he was deaf. his wounds were very serious and he might have been unconscious for
two weeks two months six months before he awakened who could tell? and then afterwards
the faintings in and out and the long periods when he simply lay in between
thinking and dreaming and imagining things.
when you're completely unconscious there is no such thing as time it goes like the
snap of your finger you're awake and zip you're awake again with no idea of how long a
time passed between. then when you're fainting in and out time must still seem shorter
than to a normal person because you're really half crazy and half awake and time bunches
up on you. they said his mother was in labor three days when she had him and yet when
it was all over she figured she had been in labor for about ten hours. even with pain and
everything time had seemed shorter to her than it really was. now if all this was true he
probably had lost more time than he suspected. he might even have lost a year two years.
the idea gave him a funny prickling feeling. it was a kind of fear yet not like any
ordinary fear. it was more of a panic it was the panicky dread of losing yourself even
from yourself. it made him a little stick at his stomach.
the whole idea had been taking form in his head for a long while the idea of trapping
time and getting himself back into the world but he hadn't been able to concentrate en it.
he had drifted off into dreams or he had found himself suddenly in the middle of thinking
of something entirely different. once he thought he had the problem solved by the visits
of the nurse. he didn't know how many times she came into his room every twenty-four
hours but she must have a schedule. all he had to do was to count the seconds then the
minutes then the hours between each visit she made until he had twenty-four hours
counted and after that he would be able to figure the days simply by counting her visits.
there would be no danger of a slip-up because the vibration of her footsteps always
awakened him. then just in case the spacing of her visits might be changed sometime he
could figure out things like the number of his bowel movements each day and he could
also figure out the other things which happened maybe only two or three or four times a
week like his baths and the changing of his bed clothes and mask. then if any of these
things changed he could check up on it by the others.
it took a long time to make his mind stick on the idea long enough to figure out this
formula because he wasn't used to thinking but in the end he thought it through and
started putting it into effect. the instant the nurse left him he began to count. he counted
to sixty which meant a minute as nearly as he would ever be able to figure it. then in one
side of his mind he checked up the minute he had measured and began counting from one
to sixty again. the first time he tried it he got up to eleven minutes before his mind
slipped off the track and his figures were lost. it happened like this. he was counting
along on the seconds when all of a sudden he thought maybe you're counting too fast and
then he thought remember it seems to take a sprinter an awful long time to run a hundred
yards yet he does it in only ten seconds. then he slowed down his counting while he
watched an imaginary sprinter step off a hundred yards and then he was in the middle of a
high school track meet shale city against montrose watching ted smith run the hundred
yard dash and win it with his head high lunging for the tape and all the kids from shale
city yelling their heads off and then he had lost count.
that meant he had to wait all over again for the nurse because she was his starting
point. it seemed like hundreds maybe thousands of times that he got started out and then
lost track and had to sink back angrily into the darkness of his mind and wait for the
vibration of her feet and the feel of her hands on him again so he could start anew. once
he got up to a hundred and fourteen minutes and thought i wonder how long a hundred
and fourteen minutes is in hours and stopped in spite of himself to figure it out and discovered
it was an hour and fifty-four minutes and then he remembered a phrase fifty-four
forty or fight and almost went crazy trying to recall where it came from and what it
meant. he couldn't remember and when he got back to the counting he realized that he
had lost a lot of minutes in thinking and so even though he had broken a record he was no
farther along than when the idea of time first entered his mind.
on that day he realized he was tackling the thing from the wrong angle because to
figure it out he would have to stay awake for twenty-four hours in a stretch counting
steadily all the time without making a mistake. in the first place it was almost impossible
for a normal person to stay awake counting that long much less a guy whose body was
two-thirds asleep to begin with. and in the second place he couldn't help making a
mistake because he couldn't keep the minute figures separate in his mind from the second
figures. he would be counting along on the seconds when all of a sudden he would get
panicky and think how many minutes was it i had? and even though he was almost
positive it was twenty-two or thirty-seven or whatever it was the tinge of doubt that had
first caused him to ask the question hung on and then he was sure he was wrong and by
that time he had lost count again.
he never succeeded in counting the time from one visit to the next but he began to
realize that even if he did he would then have to keep three sets of figures the seconds the
minutes and the count of the nurse's visits until twenty-four hours were completed. then
he would have to stop sometime to reduce the minutes to hours because when the minute
figures got too high he wouldn't be able to remember them at all. so with the hours he
would have a fourth set of figures. in counting just the seconds and minutes which was as
far as he ever got he tried to pretend that they were actual figures that he could see on a
blackboard. he pretended he was in a room with a blackboard on the right side and another
on the left. he would keep the minutes on the left hand blackboard and then they
would be there when he needed to add another to them. but it didn't work. he couldn't
remember. each time he failed he could feel choking gasps in his chest and stomach and
he knew that he was crying.
he decided to forget all about the counting and to check up on simpler things. it
didn't take long to discover that he had a bowel movement about once in every three
visits from the nurse although sometimes it took four visits. but that didn't tell him
anything. he remembered that doctors used to say twice a day was healthy but the people
doctors were talking about had normal food and they ate it with their mouths and
swallowed it with their throats. the stuff he was fed might give him a much higher
average than ordinary people. then again just lying in his bed from one year to the next
he might not need much food and so his score might be much less than ordinary people.
he also discovered that his bath and change of bed clothes came about once in every
twelve visits. it was thirteen once and another time only ten so he couldn't count on it
absolutely but it was at least a figure. he was a little surprised to discover that where he
had first thought of seconds and minutes he was now thinking of days and even series of
days. that was how he got on the right track.
it came to him while he was lying and feeling with the skin of his neck the line that
the covers made at his throat. he got to imagining them a mountain range snuggling
down against his throat. he had one or two strangling dreams from them but he kept on
thinking. he got to thinking that the only part of him that wasn't covered up that was free
that was just as it should be was the skin on the sides of his neck which went from the
cover-line to his ears and the half of his forehead above the mask. that skin and his hair.
he says to himself maybe there is some way you could use those patches of skin they are
free to the air and they are healthy and a guy with as few healthy things as you've got
should put them to use. so he got to thinking of what a man did with skin and he realized
that it was used to feel with. but that didn't seem enough. he thought about skin some
more and then he remembered that you could also sweat with it and that when you started
sweating you were hot but by the time the sweat covered your skin you were . cool from
the air drying the sweat. that was how he got the idea of heat and cold and that was how
he came to wait for the sunrise.
the whole thing was so simple that his stomach grew hard with excitement just from
thinking about it. all he had to do was to feel with his skin. when the temperature
changed from cool to warm he would know it was sunrise and the beginning of a day.
then he would check right through counting the nurse's visits to the next sunrise and then
he would have the number of her visits per day and he would forever afterward be able to
tell time.
he started trying to stay awake until the change in temperature occurred but half a
dozen times running he fell asleep before it happened. other times he got confused thinking
to himself is it hot now or is it cool what kind of a change am i waiting for maybe i
am running a fever maybe i am too excited and am sweating from excitement and that
would spoil the whole thing oh please god don't let me sweat don't let me run a
temperature let me know whether i'm hot now or whether i'm cold. give me some idea of
when the sunrise is coming and then i'll be able to catch it. and then after a long long
while with a lot of false starts he said to himself here sit down and think this thing over
seriously. right now you're panicky you're too anxious and you're blundering. each time
you make a mistake you've lost more time and that is one thing you can't afford to lose.
think what usually happens in the morning in a hospital and try to figure out what
follows that. that's easy he said to himself in the mornings in a hospital nurses try to get
their heavy work done. that meant that he was bathed and his bed clothes were probably
changed in the morning. he would have to take that as his starting point. he would have
to assume a few things and the first assumption would be that this was true. he already
knew that the bath and change of bedding came on an average of once in every twelve
visits.
now he had to begin assuming again. you would think in a hospital like this that
your bedding would be changed at least every other day. maybe it was once a day but he
didn't think so because at the rate of one change in every twelve visits that would make
the nurse visit him every two hours and there was so little to do he couldn't see why her
trips should be that often. so he would figure that every two days she bathed him and
changed his bedclothes and that she did this in the morning. if this was true then she
came into his room six times in a day and night. that would make it every four hours.
the simplest schedule for her to follow would be to come in at eight twelve four eight
twelve four and so on. she would probably change the bedding as early as possible in the
morning so that would be at eight o'clock.
now he said to himself what is it you want to try to check up on the sunrise first or
the sunset? he decided it was the sunrise because when the sun sets the warmth of the
day usually hangs on and the change is so slow that those two pieces of skin on his neck
might not be able to catch it. but in the early dawn everything is cool and almost the first
flash of sunlight should give some kind of heat. at least the change should be more
complete in the morning than at night so he would catch the sunrise.
he had a panicky minute when he thought what if you are on the west side of the
hospital and the setting sun comes in full on the bed and then you'll mistake that for
sunrise? what if you're on the north or south side of the hospital and never get the direct
sunlight at all? maybe that would be simpler. then he realized that even if he were on the
west side and caught the heat of the setting sun he would still have the visits of the nurse
to check on to tell him which was which because by now he was convinced she changed
the bed clothes in the morning.
now you damn fool he said to himself you're getting things so complicated you'll
never come out if you don't stop. the first thing to do is to catch the sunrise. next time
the nurse comes into the room and bathes you and changes the bed clothes you are going
to assume it is eight o'clock in the morning. then you can think about anything you want
to without worrying or you can even go to sleep because each time she comes in she
awakens you. you will wait and count five more visits and that should make the fifth one
somewhere around four o'clock in the morning. four o'clock in the morning is just before
sunrise so after the fifth visit from the nurse you will stay awake and concentrate every
bit of your mind and skin on the job of catching the temperature change when it comes.
maybe it'll work and maybe it won't. if it does all you have to do is to wait six more trips
and see if there is another sunrise and if there is you'll have the number of trips every
twenty-four hours and that will give you a way of setting up a calendar around the nurse's
visits. the important thing is to catch two sunrises in a row and then you have trapped
time forever then you can begin to catch up with the world.
it was eight visits later before he felt the nurse's hands on him as she took off his
nightshirt and began to sponge his stump with warm water. he felt his heart quicken and
his blood send a warm glow of excitement to his skin because he was going to start out
once more to trap time only now he was doing it smartly he was doing it wisely. he felt
himself rolled over on his side and held there while the bed quivered from the nurse's
work. then he was rolled back between crisp cool sheets. the nurse thumped around at
the foot of the bed for a minute. he felt the vibrations of her footsteps as she walked from
place to place in the room. then the vibrations receded and there was a sharp little tremor
of the door closing and he knew he was alone.
calm down he said to himself calm down because you haven't proved anything yet.
you may have this thing doped out all wrong. maybe the things you've assumed are all
wrong. if they are then you've got to make a whole new set of assumptions so don't get so
cocky. just calm down and lie back and count five more visits. he dozed a little and he
thought of a lot of things but always on the blackboard in his mind he kept the number
two or three or whatever it was and finally the fifth visit came with the nurse's feet
vibrating against the floor and her hands on him and on the bed. according to the things
he had figured out it should now be four o'clock in the morning and in a little while
depending on whether it was winter or summer or fall or spring the sun would rise.
when she left he began concentrating. he didn't dare fall asleep. he didn't dare
permit his mind to wander for one minute. he didn't dare let the suffocating excitement
that was all over him and inside of him interfere with his thinking and feeling as he lay
there waiting for the sunrise. he had come on the trail of something so precious and so
exciting that it was almost like being born all over again into the world. he lay there and
thought in one hour three hours certainly in ten hours i will feel a change on my skin and
then i will know whether it is day or night.
it seemed that time was standing perfectly still just to spite him. he got panicky little
spasms when he felt sure the change had occurred without him catching it and with each
little spasm he seemed to get sick to his stomach. then there would be a clear period
when he would very calmly feel with his skin and convince himself that he was sane that
he hadn't fallen asleep and missed it that his mind hadn't wandered that the change was
still ahead.
and then all of a sudden he realized it was coming. the muscles in his back and
thighs and stomach stiffened because he knew it was coming. he could almost feel the
sweat squeeze out of his body as he tried to hold his breath lest he miss it. the pieces of
skin on each side of his neck and the half of his forehead seemed to tingle as if they had
been paralyzed and now were getting a fresh supply of blood. it felt as if the pores of his
neck were actually reaching out to grab at the change to suck it in.
the whole thing was so slow so gradual that it seemed impossible it was happening
at all. there was no danger now of his mind wandering or of falling asleep. it would be
like falling asleep in the middle of a first kiss. it would be like falling asleep in the
middle of running a hundred yard dash and winning it. the only thing he could do was
wait and feel out with his skin and catch every second of the change every slow
movement of time and temperature as they offered him a return of life.
it seemed like he lay there stiff and expectant and excited for hours. there were
tunes when he was sure that the nerves of his neck were not registering when it seemed
they had suddenly gone numb and that the change might slip away from him. and then
there were other times when it felt as if his nerves had jabbed through so near the surface
of his skin that there was actual pain sharp and fine and penetrating as they groped to
register the change.
and then the thing began to happen swiftly and more swiftly and although he knew
he was in a sheltered hospital room as far removed as possible from changes in temperature
it seemed to him when it came that it came in a blaze of heat. it felt like his neck was
seared burned scorched from the heat of the rising sun. it had penetrated his room. he
had recaptured time—he had won his fight. the muscles of his body relaxed. in his mind
in his heart in whatever parts of him that were left he was singing singing singing. it was
dawn.
all over the world or at least all over the country to which he had been brought the
sun was rising in the east and people were getting out of bed and the hills were turning
pink and birds were singing. all over europe or all over america it was sun-up. what the
hell did it matter if you didn't have any nose so long as you could smell the dawn? he lay
without nostrils and he sniffed. he caught the smell of dew on grass and he shivered
because it was so delicious. he shaded his eyes against the first bright rays of the
morning sun and looked off and he saw the high mountains of colorado in the east and he
saw the sun coming over them and he saw colors creeping down their sides and in the
nearer distance he saw rolling brown hills which became pink and lavender like the inside
of a seashell. and still closer in the field in which he stood and clear up to his ankles he
saw the green grass and it was sparkling and he burst into tears. he thanked god that he
could see the dawn.
he turned from the sunrise and looked toward the little town in which he lived
toward the little town in which he had been born. all of the rooftops were rosy with the
dawn. even the houses that were unpainted and square and squat and ugly were beautiful.
he heard the lowing of cows waiting to be milked in back yards for the town in which he
had been born was a very sensible town and each man had his cow. he heard the slam of
back screen doors as sleepy householders went to the chicken yard or to the barn yard to
take care of their animals. and he could see inside the houses where men were getting out
of bed and yawning healthily and scratching their chests and groping for house slippers
and finally getting up and going into the kitchen where their wives had sausages and hot
cakes and coffee for them.
he saw babies squirming in their cribs and rubbing their eyes with tiny fists and
maybe smiling or maybe crying and maybe smelling a little bad but looking awfully
healthy as they greeted the sunshine as they greeted the morning as they greeted the
dawn. he saw all of these things all of these beautiful homely things as he looked toward
the town and he had only to turn from the town to look at the sun and the mountains.
oh god god thank god he thought i've got it now and they can't take it away from
me. he thought i have seen the dawn again and i will see it every morning from now on.
he thought thank you god thank you thank you. he thought if i never have anything else
i will always have dawn and morning sunlight.
chapter 12
new year's eve. snow flying in the air wet snow clouds sifting close over shale city.
everything still with lights glowing inside warm houses. no confetti no champagne bottles
no yelling no noise at all. the quietude of new year for ordinary people who worked
and were kind and wanted only peace. happy new year. his father kissing his mother and
saying happy new year my dear we've been lucky the kids are healthy i love you happy
new year i hope the new one turns out as well as the old.
new year's eve at the bakery with guys saying goddam i'm glad it's over the next one
can't be any worse happy new year hell let's go out into the fog and get drunk. walking
out of the bakery on new year's eve with the bins every which-way and the ovens empty
and the conveyors stopped and the wrapping machines paralyzed and the dividers still
and nobody but the crew going out of a strange silent place with their voices echoing
flatly against dead machinery. the guys at the bakery going out to celebrate the new year.
the guys in saloons shoving free ones across the bar and saying happy new year and
many more of them kid you been a good customer have one on the house happy new year
and the hell with the prohibitionists some day the bastards are going to give us trouble.
the girls from the hash houses and the girls from the hotels and the guys swarming out of
dirty little apartment bedrooms and music and dancing and smoke and somebody with a
ukulele and have another and the feeling of being lonesome that everybody has inside
him and people bouncing against you and off you and have another one and a girl passing
out at the bar and a fight and happy new year.
oh god the happy happy new year he had counted three hundred and sixty-five days
and now it was new year's eve. it didn't seem like a year. it had gone by like a lifetime
when you look back and think of a time so far away that you can't clearly remember what
happened yet a time that has gone so quickly it seems only a minute ago it started. six
visits from the nurse each day—thirty days to a month— and now three hundred and
sixty-five days. it had gone quickly because he was doing something he was keeping
track of time like other people he had sets of figures to remember he controlled a little
world of his own lagging behind that on the outside but still nearer to it than before. he
had a calendar in which the sun and the moon and the seasons had no place a calendar
with thirty days for each month and twelve months in the year and now five extra days to
make up the difference with the nurse's next visit to make it new year's morning.
he had been a very busy guy and he had learned a lot. he had learned how to check
everything against something else so that he couldn't possibly lose the grip he had gained
on time. he could tell day from night without straining for the sunrise. he knew exactly
what visit from the nurse would bring him a bath and a change of bedclothes. when the
schedule was interrupted and the nurse was a visit late he grew disappointed and sullen
and tried to imagine what she was doing but when she finally came he was always
excited.
he could even tell his nurses apart. the day nurse was steady but the night nurses
seemed to change. the day nurse had smooth slick hands a little hard like the hands of a
woman who has worked a long while so he guessed that she was middle aged and he
imagined her with gray hair. she always came directly to the bed from the door in four
firm steps so he figured that his bed was about ten feet from the door. her footsteps were
heavier than the night nurses' so he took her for a large woman. her steps were almost as
heavy as those of the doctor who came in once in a great while and poked around for a
little time and then went away. the day nurse had a brisk way of doing things —flip and
he was on his side whoosh and a sheet slid next to him flop and he was on his back
swipe-swipe and he was bathed. she knew her business this old day nurse and he liked
her. once in a great while she came in at night instead of the night nurse. he always
squirmed to let her know he was pleased to see her and she patted him on the stomach
and ran her hand through the thin hair on his skull to tell him thanks and how are you?
the night nurses were irregular. sometimes he would have two or three of them the
same week. most of them took more steps from the door to the bed than the day nurse
and their treads were lighter. they closed the door softer or harder and they wandered
around the room more. mostly their hands were very soft and just moist enough to go
bumpily instead of smoothly over his body. he knew they were young. when a new nurse
came in he always knew what she would do first. she would pull the covers off him and
then she would make no movements for a minute or two and he would know she was
looking at him and probably getting a little sick. one of them turned and ran out of the
room and didn't come back. that way he didn't get his urinal and so he wet the bed but he
forgave her for it. another one cried. he felt her tears on the chest of his night shirt. he
got a little passionate because he suddenly felt she was very close to him and he lay in
pain for hours after she left. he imagined her young and beautiful.
all of these things were interesting they were important they kept him a very busy
guy. he had made a new universe he had organized it to his liking and he was living in it.
and this was new year's eve although on the outside it might be the fourth of july for all
he cared. he named the days of the week monday through sunday and he named the
months so he could celebrate the holidays. each sunday afternoon he went for a walk in
some woods that were just outside paris. once in springtime when he was on leave he
walked in them so now it was springtime every sunday afternoon as he walked through
the woods in his uniform with his chest way out and his legs pumping and his arms
swinging free. when july came and the trout were biting he went up to grand mesa and
talked things over with his father. they had lots to talk about they had learned lots since
the last time they saw each other. it's much better than worrying his father said you worry
so much you don't enjoy life death is better only i wish i knew how your mother was.
each night summer and winter week in and week out he went to sleep with kareen
whispering to her god bless you kareen darling god bless you. i don't know what i'd do
without you here beside me every night the others have all gone and i'm alone except for
you kareen. they slept with his arm around her or her's around him and they always
turned together. they nestled tight against one another and he kissed her in his dreams all
night long.
a year—what a hell of a long time a year was. kareen was nineteen that day a
minute ago when he said goodbye to her at the railroad station. he was four months in
training camp and eleven months in france so that made her over twenty. then the time
he had lost completely would probably even it up to another year. and now another. and
others to come others and others. kareen must be twenty-two by now. she was at least
twenty-two. three years. it would go on that way as long as he lived. ten more years and
kareen would have lines. a little later and her hair would be gray and then she would be
an old woman an old old woman and the girl at the station would never have existed.
he knew it wasn't true. kareen would never grow old. she was still nineteen. she
would be nineteen forever. her hair would stay brown and her eyes clear and her skin
fresh like rain. he would never let one line mark her face. that was something he could
do for her that no other man on earth could ever do. he could keep her safe beside him
young and beautiful forever safe from time in the world he had built where time moved
according to orders and every sunday was spring. but where would she be—the real
kareen—the kareen out in the world out in time? while he slept with the nineteen
year old kareen every night was the real kareen with somebody else a woman now
perhaps with a baby? kareen grown up and far away having forgotten him . . .
he wished he could be near her. not that he could ever see her not that he wanted her
to see him. but he would like to feel that he was breathing the same air she breathed that
he was in the same country she was in. he remembered the funny excitement inside him
when he used to start out for old mike's house for kareen's house. the closer he got the
sweeter the air seemed. he used to tell himself although he knew it wasn't true that the air
around her house was different because it was near to her.
he had never cared particularly where he was where they had taken him—but
thinking now of kareen he got homesick. his mind was wailing i wish to god i was in
america i wish i was home. it seemed that an american any american was a friend
compared to any englishman or frenchman. that was because he was an american
himself america was his home he had been born there and anyone outside was a stranger.
then he would say to himself what do you care you'll never be able to see or talk or walk
you won't know the difference you might as well be in turkey as america. but that
wasn't true. a guy liked to think he was home. even though he could do nothing but lie in
blackness it would be better if the blackness were the blackness of home and if the people
who moved in the blackness were his own people his own american people.
but that was too much to hope for. in the first place a blast strong enough to tear his
arms and legs off must have blown all identification to hell and gone. when you have
only a back and a stomach and half a head you probably look as much like a frenchman
or a german or an englishman as an american. the only way they would have of telling
what country he was from would be by the place they found him. and he was pretty sure
he had been found among englishmen. the regiment had been stationed right alongside a
limey regiment and when they went over the top both the americans and the limeys
went together. he remembered very clearly that the americans shifted to the left among
the limeys because there was a little hill just in front of the american position. the
germans on the hill had all been wiped out two days before so there was no use of the
americans puffing their way up it. they all shifted to the left as they went over and they
were all mixed up with the limeys. he remembered looking around when he dived into
that dugout and seeing only two americans and all the rest limeys. just a flash of them
just a thought of them then blackness.
so he was probably in some crummy english hospital with people all taking him for
a limey and on the report sent home about him there was nothing except missing in
action. maybe it was just as well he was eating through a tube that english coffee was so
stinking bad. roast beef and pudding and soggy pastries and bad coffee. it was just as
well. only he wasn't any american any longer he was an englishman. he was a limey
and probably a citizen at that. it gave him a lonesome feeling just to think about it. he'd
never had any particular ideas about america. he'd never been very patriotic. it was
something you took without even thinking. but now it seemed to him that if he were
really lying in an english hospital he had lost something he could never hope to get back.
for the first time in his whole life he felt that it would be a little pleasant a little
comforting to be in the hands of his own people.
those limeys were a funny bunch of guys. they were more like foreigners than the
frenchmen. a frenchman you could understand but a limey was always twitching his
nose and you couldn't understand him at all. when you were stationed right next to them
for two months you began to understand just how foreign they were. they did some funny
things. there was a little scotchman in the limey regiment who threw down his gun
and quit the war when he heard that the huns on the other side of nomansland were
bavarians. the little scotchman said that the bavarians were commanded by crown
prince rupert and that the crown prince was the last stuart heir to the throne of england
and the rightful king and that he would be goddamed if he would fight his king just
because some hanoverian pretender told him to.
now in any ordinary army they would take you out and shoot you for a thing like
that. but that's the way limeys were funny. this little guy caused a hell of a stink. two or
three of his officers argued with him very politely instead of shooting him and when they
couldn't get him to see things their way they called the colonel. so the colonel came and
had a long talk with the scotchman and everybody seemed .puzzled and the scotchman
got tougher and tougher and dared them to shoot him because he said his court martial
would bring out the truth that everything was a fraud and king george would have to
resign and how would lloyd george like that? the colonel went away and the scotchman
stayed sitting down on the bottom of the trench and pretty soon there came an order
from g.h.q. transferring him back of the lines for six weeks or until the bavarians went
away so he wouldn't have to fire in the direction of troops commanded by his king. that
was how funny limeys were and that was how both the americans and the limeys knew
there were bavarians across from them.
then take lazarus. he showed up one gray morning when nothing was happening.
all of a sudden out of the fog loomed this big fat hun coming toward the british lines.
afterwards there was a lot of talk about what he was doing there all alone in the first
place. probably he was on patrol duty and had lost his way or else he was trying to desert
or maybe he had gone a little crazy and was just wandering around out there among the
barbed wire and the shell holes for the hell of it. he had a kind of aimless way of pitching
from side to side. he would hit a line of barbed wire and stumble and try to feel his way
along it for a minute. finally he would climb it awkwardly like a drunk and come jerking
on toward the limeys.
it was a pretty dull morning and the limeys were cold and uncomfortable and sore
about the war so somebody took a shot at the hun. the poor guy stood stock still peering
through the fog like he was surprised anybody would want to shoot him. then the whole
limey regiment began to pop off at him. even as his body sagged he had a kind of hurt
and puzzled look. they let him lie out there with one arm hung over the barbed wire like
a sentry who was pointing the way for someone else.
nobody paid any attention to him for several days and then both the americans and
the limeys began to notice that when the wind was right that hun was raising quite a
stink. but it was only when the wind was just so and nobody cared much until one day
when the colonel who had sent the little scotchman back of the lines came through on
inspection. the colonel was a great guy to stand on form. corporal timlon who came
from manchester always swore that in a pinch the colonel would execute nine men to
keep up the morale of the tenth. anyhow the colonel was walking along with his
moustache waxed and his bony old nose high in the wind when all of a sudden he got a
sniff of the hun.
that's a very strong odor he said to corporal timlon. he's a bavarian sir said
corporal timlon they always smell worse. the colonel coughed and blew his nose and
said very bad for the morale of the men very bad take a squad out tonight and bury him
corporal. corporal timlon started to explain that things were pretty fidgity out there even
at night but the colonel interrupted him. and corporal he said stuffing his handkerchief
back into his pocket don't forget—a word of prayer. corporal timlon said yes sir and then
looked hard at his men to see who was grinning so that he could figure who to take out on
the burial squad.
so that night corporal timlon took a detail of eight men. they dug a hole and
pushed that bavarian into it and the corporal said a word of prayer like the colonel told
him and they filled the hole and came on back. the air was pretty well cleaned up next
day but the day after that heinie got a little nervous and began dropping shells all around
the limey regiment. the limeys weren't hurt any but one of the big ones happened to
catch the bavarian. he leaped into the air like in a slow motion picture and landed high
and dry on the wire again with his finger pointing toward the limey regiment exactly like
a stool pigeon. that was when corporal timlon started calling him lazarus.
things were pretty busy that day and all through the night. every time the limeys
had an idle half hour they would shoot at lazarus in kind of a lazy way hoping they
might knock him off the wire because they knew the nearer he was to the ground the less
he would smell and that bavarian was getting awfully gamy. but he managed to hang
onto the wire and the next morning the colonel came through again. first thing he did
was sniff the air and get a strong flavor of lazarus. he turned to corporal timlon and
said corporal timlon when i was subaltern an order was an order and not just an
interesting suggestion. yes sir said corporal timlon. you will take a full burial squad out
tonight said the colonel and you will bury the corpse six feet deep. and just so that you
will not take orders so lightly in the future you will read the full service of the church of
england over the body of our fallen enemy. but sir said corporal timlon you see things
have been pretty heavy here and-------
that night corporal timlon took a full burial squad out. they also took a sheet to
wrap lazarus in. it wasn't very tasty work because lazarus had gotten to the runny stage
by that time but they wrapped him in the sheet and planted him six feet deep and then all
of them stood around the grave while corporal timlon read the burial service maybe
skipping over a few ands and ors but getting the general idea across pretty well.
about the middle of the service a couple flares went up from the other side and just
as the corporal was throwing the third handful of dirt into lazarus' face somebody got a
bead on him and shot him right smack through the bottom. corporal timlon hollered out
god 'ave mercy on your soul amen those bloody barstards 'ave shot me in the arse that's
wot they've done mike for cover men. and they all scrambled back to the lines.
corporal timlon got eight weeks hospital leave which was lucky for him because the
whole limey regiment was almost wiped out three weeks later. a couple days after
corporal timlon was shot lazarus stopped another one and hit the fence again with his
sheets flapping in the wind and parts of him dripping toward the ground. one of the
limeys said that was to be expected because bavarians never held up very well after the
first week. the whole regiment opened fire on poor lazarus and managed to shoot him
off the wire. you could still smell him but you couldn't see him any more so everybody
tried to forget him. they would have too if it hadn't been for the new subaltern.
he was just a kid only eighteen with wavy blonde hair and blue eyes looking like a
six foot baby anxious as hell to win the war all by himself. he was a cousin of the captain
or something and the officers made a regular pet out of him. he came up to the front two
days after lazarus was shot off the wire. the limeys were so fond of him they kept him
pretty well under cover and the kid somehow got the idea he was being picked on and
that the men would think he was a coward. he begged all .the time to be assigned to night
patrol duty and when it was no go he sneaked out on his own one night. they missed him
about three o'clock in the morning and it was almost dawn before they found him.
somehow he had wandered out beyond the first line of barbed wire. when they came on
him he was lying on his stomach in a pool of vomit. in stumbling through the barbed wire
he had fallen and struck his right arm clean up to the shoulder through lazarus.
the detail that found him brought him to the officers' dugout. he was babbling and
crying and smelling to high heaven. the captain sent him back the same night. he said it
was a penalty for befouling the officers' dugout and he got very stern when anyone
inquired what had happened to the kid. when corporal timlon came back with his seat
repaired and someone told him the story he asked well how is the kid getting along? a
little guy named johnston who kept the whole regiment posted on such things said oh hell
he's mad as a hatter they haven't even let him out of the straight-jacket yet. well said
corporal timlon when is he going to get better? the doctors say he ain't never going to
get better said johnston he's bad off that one.
poor young blonde english guy wanting to win the war so bad and going stark crazy
before he even got into action. poor limey kid somewhere in a hospital behind barred
windows yelling and crying and brooding forever. that was a funny thing. the young
limey had legs and arms and he could talk and see and hear. only he didn't know it he
couldn't get any fun out of it there was no meaning to it for him. and lying in another
english hospital was a guy who wasn't a bit crazy but who wished he was. he and the
young limey should swap minds. then they'd both be happy.
somewhere crying and sobbing in the dark—it was night now almost new year's—
there was the young limey. and here he was in the dark sobbing and crying too. on new
year's eve. poor young limey don't cry it's just new year's just think a whole fresh year
stretching out in front of both of us. wherever you are limey—and maybe you're right
here in this same hospital—wherever you are we have lots in common we are brothers
young limey happy new year to you. happy happy new year....
chapter 13
during the second year of his new time world nothing happened except that once a night
nurse stumbled and fell to the floor setting up a fine vibration in his bedsprings. during
the third year he was moved to a new room. the heat of the sun in the new room came in
over the foot of his bed and by checking against the bath hour he figured that his head
was to the east and his other end to the west. his new bed had a softer mattress and its
springs were stiffer. they carried vibrations longer and that helped him a great deal. it
took him months to locate the door and the dresser but they were months filled with
calculation and excitement and finally with triumph. they were the shortest months he
could remember in his whole life. all of this made the third year whisk by like a dream.
the fourth year started very slowly. he spent a lot of time trying to remember the
books of the bible in their order but the only ones he could be sure of were matthew
mark luke and john and first and second samuel and first and second kings. he tried
to put words to the story of david and goliath and nebuchadnezzar and shadrack
meshack and abednego. he remembered how his father used to yawn loudly around ten
o'clock at night and stretch his arms and get up out of his chair and say shadrack
meshack and to bed we go. but he couldn't remember the stories that went with the
characters very clearly so they were poor time fillers. that was bad because when he
couldn't fill in the time he got to worrying. he got to thinking i wonder if i haven't made
a mistake in figuring the days the weeks the months? he got to thinking it wouldn't be
impossible to drop even a whole year if a person were careless. then he would get excited
and frantic. he would check back and back to make sure he hadn't made a mistake
so far back that he would get more confused than before. every time he fell asleep he
tried to have the day and month and year numbers firmly planted in his mind lest he
forget them while he dreamed and every time he awakened his first panicky thought
leaped at the terrible possibility he might not have remembered correctly the numbers he
had in his mind when he fell asleep.
and then an astonishing thing happened. one day toward the middle of the year the
nurse gave him a completely fresh change of bed linen when he had received a change
only the day before. this had never happened before. every third day he was changed no
sooner and no later. yet here everything was upset and for two days in a row he was
getting the change. he felt all in a hub-bub. he felt like bustling around from room to
room and chattering about how busy he was and what great things were going to happen.
he felt all bright with expectation and excitement. he wondered if he would get a fresh
change of linen every day from now on or whether they would return again to the old
schedule. this was as important as if an ordinary man with legs and arms and other parts
were suddenly confronted with the possibility of living in a new house every day. it
would be something to look forward to from day to day throughout the years. it would be
something to break up time to make it something a guy could stand without mulling over
matthew mark luke and john.
then he noticed something else. in addition to giving him an unexpected bath the
nurse was spraying him with something. he could feel the spray cool and misty against
his skin. then she put a clean nightshirt on him and folded the covers back at his throat.
this was different too. he could feel her hand through the covers as it passed over the
fold smoothing smoothing smoothing. he was given a fresh mask which the nurse
arranged very fussily so that it fell to his throat and there was carefully tucked under the
fold of the bedcovers. after that she combed his hair carefully and left. he could feel the
vibrations of her footsteps as she went away and the little jar of the door closing behind
her. then he was alone.
he lay perfectly still because it was a very luxurious feeling to be so completely
redone. his body glowed and his sheets were cool and crisp and even his scalp felt good.
he was afraid to move for fear he would spoil the good feeling. there was only a
moment of this and then he felt the vibrations of four maybe five people coming into his
room. he lay tense trying to catch their vibrations and wondering why they were there.
the vibrations got heavier and then they stopped and he knew that people were gathered
around his bed more people than ever before had been in his room at the same time. it
was like the first time he went to school and was embarrassed and bewildered with so
many people around. little tremors of expectations ran through his stomach. he was stiff
with excitement. he had visitors.
the first thought that passed through his mind was that they might be his mother and
sisters and kareen. there was just a chance that kareen forever lovely and young was
standing by him was looking down at him was even this minute putting out her hand her
soft and tiny hand her beautiful beautiful hand to touch his forehead.
and then just as he could almost feel the touch of her hand his delight turned
suddenly to shame. he hoped more than anything else in the world that it was not his
mother and sisters and kareen who had come to visit him. he didn't want them to see
him. he didn't want anybody he had ever known to see him. he knew now how foolish it
had been to wish for them as sometimes in his loneliness he had. it was all right to think
about having them near it was comforting it was warm and pleasant. but the idea that
they might be beside his bed right now was too terrible to cope with. he jerked his head
convulsively away from his visitors. he knew this dislodged his mask but he was beyond
thinking of masks. he only wanted to hide his face to turn his blind sockets away from
them to keep them from seeing the chewed up hole that used to be a nose and mouth that
used to be a living human face. he got so frantic that he began to thrash from side to side
like someone very sick with a high fever who can only monotonously repeat a motion or
a word. he fell into his old rocking motion throwing his weight from one shoulder to the
other back and forth back and forth back and forth.
a hand came to rest on his forehead. he quieted because it was the hand of a man
heavy and warm. part of it lay on the skin of his forehead and part of it he felt through the
mask which cut across his forehead. he lay still again. then another hand began to fold
the covers back from his throat. one fold. one and a half folds. he grew very quiet very
alert very curious. he thought very hard about who they might be.
then he had it. they were doctors come to examine him. they were visiting firemen.
he was probably a very famous guy by this time and the doctors were beginning to make
pilgrimages. one doctor was probably saying to the others you see how we were able to
do it? you see what a clever job we did? you see where the arm came off and you see the
hole in his face and you see he still lives? listen to his heart it's beating just like your
heart or mine. oh we did a fine job when we got him. it was a great piece of luck and
we're all very proud. stop by in my office on your way out and i'll give you one of his
teeth for a souvenir. they take a wonderful polish he was young you see and his teeth
were in good condition. would you like a front one or would you prefer a good thick
tusker from farther back? the thick ones look best on a watch chain.
somebody was plucking at his nightshirt over his left breast. it was as if a forefinger
and thumb were pinching up a portion of it. he lay very quiet now deathly quiet his mind
jumping in a hundred different directions at once. he could sense that something
important was about to happen. there was a little more fumbling with the pinch of nightshirt
and then the cloth fell back against his chest once more. it was heavy now weighted
down by something. he felt the sudden coolness of metal through his nightshirt against
his chest over his heart. they had pinned something on him.
suddenly he did a curious thing he hadn't done for months. he started to reach with
his right hand for the heavy thing they had pinned on him and it seemed that he almost
clutched it in his fingers before he realized that he had no arm to reach with and no
fingers for clutching.
someone was kissing his temple. there was a slight tickling of hair as the kiss was
given. he was being kissed by a man with a moustache. first his left temple and then his
right one. then he knew what they had done to him. they had come into his room and
they had decorated him with a medal. he knew furthermore that he must be in france instead
of england because french generals were the ones who always kissed you when
they handed out medals. still that might not be true. american generals and english
generals shook your hand but since he had no hand to shake maybe this was an
englishman or an american who had decided to follow the french custom because there
was no other way to do it. but still the chances now seemed even that he was in france.
when he snapped back from thinking of where he was and adjusting himself to the
idea that it might be france he was a little surprised to find that he was getting mad. they
had given him a medal. three or four big guys famous guys who still had arms and legs
and who could see and talk and smell and taste had come into his room and they had
pinned a medal on him. they could afford to couldn't they the dirty bastards? that was all
they ever had time to do just run around putting medals on guys and feeling important
and smug about it. how many generals got killed in the war? there was kitchener of
course but that was an accident. how many others? name them name any of the softliving
sonsofbitches and you could have them. how many of them had got all shot up so
they had to live wrapped in a sheet for the rest of their lives? they had a lot of guts
coming around and giving medals.
when he had thought for an instant that his mother and his sisters and kareen might
be standing beside the bed he had wanted to hide. but now that he had generals and big
guys he felt a sudden fierce surging desire for them to see him. just as before he had
started to reach for the medal without an arm to reach with so now he began to blow the
mask off his face without having mouth and lips to blow with. he wanted them to get just
one look at that hole in his head. he wanted them to get their fill of a face that began and
ended with a forehead. he lay there blowing and then he realized that the air from his
lungs was all escaping through his tube. he began to, roll again from shoulder to shoulder
hoping to dislodge the mask.
while he lay there rolling and puffing he felt a vibration way down in his throat a
vibration that might be a voice. it was a short deep vibration and he knew that it was
making a sound to their ears. not a very big sound not a very intelligent sound but it must
seem to them at least as interesting as the grunting of a pig. and if he could grunt like a
pig why then he was accomplishing a great thing because before he had been completely
silent. so he lay thrashing and puffing and grunting like a pig hoping that they would see
damned well how much he appreciated their medal. while he was in the middle of this
there was an indefinite churning of footsteps and then the departing vibrations of his
guests. a moment later he was all alone in the blackness in the silence. he was all alone
with his medal.
suddenly he quieted. he was thinking about the vibrations of those footsteps. he had
always carefully felt for vibrations. he had measured the size of his nurses and the
dimensions of his room by them. but suddenly to feel the vibrations of four or five
people tramping across the room made him think. it made him realize that vibrations
were very important. he had thought of them up to this time only as vibrations coming to
him. now he began to consider that also there could be vibrations going from him. the
vibrations which he received told him everything—height weight distance time. why
shouldn't he be able to tell something to the outside world by vibrations also?
in the back of his mind something began to glimmer. if he could in some way make
use of vibrations he could communicate with these people. then the glimmer became a
great dazzling white light. it opened up such breathless prospects that he thought he
might suffocate from sheer excitement. vibrations were a very important part of communication.
the fall of a foot on the floor is one kind of vibration. the tap of a telegraph
key is simply another kind.
when he was a kid way back maybe four years ago or five he had a wireless set. he
and bill harper used to telegraph each other. dot dash dot dash dot. particularly on rainy
nights when their folks wouldn't let them go out and there was nothing to do and they just
lounged around the house and got in everybody's way. on such nights he and bill harper
used to dot and dash at each other and they had a hell of a good time. he still remembered
the morse code. all he had to do in order to break through to people in the outside
world was to lie in bed and dot dash to the nurse. then he could talk. then he would have
smashed through his silence and blackness and helplessness. then the stump of a man
without lips would talk. he had captured time and he had tried to figure geography and
now he would do the greatest thing of them all he would talk. he would give messages
and receive messages and he would have made another step forward in his struggle to get
back to people in his terrible lonely eagerness for the feel of people near him for the
things that were in their minds for the thoughts they might give him his own thoughts
were so puny so unfinished so incomplete. he would talk.
tentatively he raised his head from the pillow and let it fall back again. then he did
it twice quickly. that would be a dash and two dots. the letter d. he tapped out sos
against his pillow. dot-dot-dot dot dot dot-dot-dot. sos. help. if there was anybody in
the whole world needed help he was the guy and now he was asking for it. he wished the
nurse would hurry back. he began to tap out questions. what time is it? what's the date?
where am i? is the sun shining or is it cloudy? does anybody know who i am? do my
folks know i'm lying here? don't tell them. don't let them know anything about it. sos.
help.
the door of the room jarred open and the nurse's footsteps came up to the bed. he
began to tap out more frantically now. here he was right on the brink of finding people of
finding the world of finding a big part of life itself. tap tap tap. he was waiting for her
tap tap tap in response. a tap against his forehead or his chest. even if she didn't know
the code she could tap just to let him know she understood what he was doing. then she
could rush away for someone who could help her get what he was saying. sos. sos.
sos. help.
he felt the nurse standing there looking down at him trying to figure out what he was
doing. the mere possibility that she didn't understand after all he had gone through before
discovering it himself shocked him into such excitement and fear that he began to
grunt again. he lay grunting and tapping grunting and tapping until the muscles in the
back of his neck ached until his head ached until he felt that his chest would burst from
his eagerness to shout out to explain to her what he was trying to do. and still he felt her
standing motionless beside his bed looking down and wondering.
then he felt her hand against his forehead. for just a moment she held it there. he
kept on tapping growing angry now and hopeless and feeling like he wanted to throw up.
she began to stroke his forehead in slow gentle motions. she was stroking it in a way she
had never done it before. he felt pity in the softness of her touch. then her hand went
from his forehead clear back through his hair and he remembered that kareen used to do
that sometimes. but he put kareen out of his mind and kept right on tapping because this
was such an important thing that he couldn't stop for pleasant sensations.
the pressure of the hand against his forehead was getting heavier. he realized that
she was trying by the weight of her hand to make him tired so he'd quit tapping. he began
to tap all the harder all the faster to show her that her plan wouldn't work. he could feel
the vertebrae in the back of his neck crack and pop from the strain of this unexpected
work. the nurse's hand grew heavier and heavier on his head. his neck grew tireder and
tireder. it had been a terrible day a long day an exciting day. his tapping grew slower and
her hand got still heavier and finally he lay back very quietly against the pillow while she
brushed his forehead.
chapter 14
he had lost all track of time. all his work to trap it all his counting and calculation of it
might just as well never have happened. he had lost track of everything except the
tapping. the instant he awakened he began to tap and he continued until the moment
when drowsiness overcame him. even as he fell asleep the past portion of his energy and
thought went into the tapping so that it seemed he dreamed of tapping. because he tapped
while he was awake and dreamed of tapping while he was asleep his old difficulty in
distinguishing between wakefulness and sleep sprang up again. he was never quite
positive that he was not dreaming when awake and tapping when asleep. he had lost time
so utterly that he had no idea how long the tapping had been going on. maybe only weeks
maybe a month perhaps even a year. the one sense that remained to him out of the
original five had been completely hypnotized by the tapping and as for thinking he didn't
even pretend to any more. he didn't speculate about the new night nurses in their comings
and goings. he didn't listen for vibrations against the floor. he didn't think of the
past and he didn't consider the future. he only lay and tapped his message over and over
again to people on the outside who didn't understand.
the day nurse tried hard to soothe him but she did it only as if she were trying to
calm an irritable patient. she did it in such a way that he knew he would never break
through as long as he had her. it never seemed to occur to her that there was a mind of
intelligence working behind the rhythm of his head against the pillow. she was simply
watching over an incurably sick patient trying to make his sickness as comfortable as
possible. she never thought that to be dumb was a sickness and that he had found the cure
for it that he was trying to tell her he was well he was not dumb any longer he was a man
who could talk. she gave him hot baths. she shifted the position of his bed. she adjusted
the pillow in back of his head now higher now lower. when she moved it higher the
increased angle bent his head forward. after tapping for a time in this position he could
feel pain shooting all the way down his spine and across his back. but he kept right on
tapping.
she got to massaging him and he liked that she had such a brisk gentle touch to her
fingers but he kept on tapping. and then one day he felt a change in the touch of her
fingers. they were not gentle and brisk any longer. he felt the change through the tips of
her fingers through the tenderness of her touch he felt pity and hesitancy and a great
gathering love that was neither him for her nor her for him but rather a kind of love that
took in all living things and tried to make them a little more comfortable a little less
unhappy a little more nearly like others of their kind.
he felt the change through the tips of her fingers and a sharp little twinge of disgust
went through him but in spite of the disgust he was responding to the touch responding to
the mercy in her heart that caused her to touch him so. her hands sought out the far parts
of his body. they inflamed his nerves with a kind of false passion that fled in little
tremors along the surface of his skin. even while he was thinking oh my god it's come to
this here is the reason she thinks i'm tapping goddam her god bless her what shall i do?—
even while he was thinking it he fell in with her rhythm he strained to her touch his heart
pounded to a faster tempo and he forgot everything in the world except the motion and
the sudden pumping of his blood . . .
there was a girl named ruby and she for him was the first. it was when he was in
the eighth maybe the ninth grade. ruby lived down in teller addition on the otherside of
the tracks. ruby was younger than he maybe only in the sixth or seventh grade but she
was a great big girl an italian and very fat. all the boys in town somehow began with
ruby because she never embarrassed them. she came right to the point and that was that
although once in a while you had to tell her she was pretty. but no other nonsense and if a
guy didn't have any experience why ruby never laughed at him and never told on him
she just went right ahead and gave it to him.
the guys liked to talk about ruby when there wasn't anything better to talk about.
they liked to laugh about her in such talks and say oh no i never see ruby any more i
manage to get around, i'm finding something new every day. but that was all talk because
they were really very young guys and ruby was the first and only girl they knew they
were too shy with other girls with nice girls. they soon grew ashamed of ruby and when
they went down they would always feel a little dirty and a little disgusted. they came
away blaming ruby somehow for making them feel that way. by the time they got to the
tenth grade none of them would ever speak to ruby and finally she disappeared. she just
wasn't around any more and they were all kind of glad they didn't have to meet her on the
street.
there was laurette down at stumpy telsa's place. stumpy telsa had a house in shale
city. she had five or six girls there and the finest pair of boston bulls in town. the guys
when they were young when they were maybe fourteen or fifteen used to wonder a great
deal about stumpy telsa's place. for them it was the most wonderful the most exciting
the most mysterious house in shale city. they would hear stories from older guys on
what went on down there. they could never quite decide whether they were for it or
against it but they were always interested.
one night three of them went down through the alley in back of stumpy telsa's and
crept through the back yard and tried to peek in through the kitchen door. there was a
colored cook there making sandwiches and she saw them and let out a howl. stumpy
telsa came swinging into the kitchen on her peg leg and grabbed a butcher knife and
came out into the back yard. they all ran like hell with stumpy telsa yelling after them
that she knew who they were and she was going right inside and phone their folks. but it
was a bluff. stumpy hadn't seen their faces and she didn't telephone anybody.
later on when they were seventeen or eighteen and practically ready to get out of
high school he and bill harper decided the hell with talking about the place all the time
so they went down to stumpy telsa's one night to find out for themselves. they walked
right into the front room and nobody pulled a knife on them or anything. it was about
eight o'clock and evidently things weren't busy because stumpy came into the parlor and
talked to them and wasn't sore at all. they were too embarrassed to say anything to
stumpy about why they came and stumpy didn't say anything to them about it either so it
turned out to be just a visit. stumpy called upstairs to the girls for a couple of them to
come down and sit in the parlor and she told the colored woman to make up a plate of
sandwiches. then she went away. alone in the parlor they could hear the two girls
coming down from upstairs and they knew that now they were going to find out whether
all the things they had heard about such places were true. some guys said that the girls
came right smack into the parlor stark naked and other guys said they'd never let you see
them naked they always wore a kimono or something. nothing they hated said these guys
so much as a man who wanted to see them without any clothes at all. so they sat with
their hearts in their throats and waited and watched.
but when the girls came down they were fully dressed. they were dressed better
than most of the girls in shale city and they were prettier than most of them too. they
came in and sat down and they talked just like anybody else would talk. one of them
seemed to like bill harper the best and the other one seemed to like him. the one who
liked him talked about books all the time. had he read this had he read that and he hadn't
read any of them and he got to feeling pretty much like a dummy. after about a half hour
of munching sandwiches and talking about books stumpy telsa came in all beaming and
smiling and told them it was time to go home. so they got up and shook hands with the
two girls and went away.
that night they took a long walk through the town discussing all the things they had
heard about stumpy telsa's place and deciding they were either lies or else they were the
kind of guys that women didn't like in that way. that was bad maybe they'd be failures
with women all their lives maybe there was something they didn't have. they decided not
to tell anybody about their visit because they felt they were much more disgraced than if
things had turned out differently.
later on he got to thinking about the girl who talked books and after thinking about
it for a long while he went down to see her again. her name was laurette and she seemed
glad to see him. she told him if he wanted to see her always to be sure he made it before
nine o'clock because after that time things were generally pretty busy. he did come again
and several times more and always they sat in the parlor and always they talked. he got
to thinking maybe i'm in love with laurette now wouldn't that be a fine thing me falling
in love with her and how would i break the news to my mother and father? and on the
other hand he would think why is it that all we do is talk what does she think i am? all
during the winter of that year and on through the spring he went down to see laurette
once maybe twice sometimes even three times a month. and each time he went down just
before he knocked on the door he would pull himself together and he would say to
himself joe bonham be a man this time. but laurette was so nice he couldn't figure out
how a fellow started things like that without seeming kind of dirty. so he never did.
when he graduated from high school he got a pair of gold cuff links through the mail
and all they had with them was a card that had the initial l written on it. he had a hell of
a time explaining to his folks who sent him the links but he prized them very highly and
he decided that tomorrow night after graduation he would go down to stumpy telsa's.
now that laurette had told him in a kind of roundabout way that she loved him things
would be different. so about nine o'clock on the big night he went down to stumpy
telsa's still hunting for some pleasant and polite way to express the thing that was in his
mind. he knocked on the door and stumpy telsa invited him in and when he asked for
laurette she told him laurette wasn't there. where had she gone? she had gone to estes
park. every year said stumpy telsa she takes three months off up there. all winter long
she buys new clothes and she saves her money and for three months she lives at the best
hotel in estes park. she goes out with guys and she dances and she dearly loves to have
the guys fall in love with her and when they fall for her she is always nice to them but she
is never too nice. she is never as nice as they want her to be. she is a smart girl that
laureite said stumpy telsa she eats her cake and she has it too. and on top of that she
saves her money and she has a nice little bankroll. why don't you get a job in some other
town and then come around in the fall after laurette is rested up and talk things over with
her? maybe you and laurette would be very happy. but by the time fall came he was
working in a bakery fifteen hundred miles away and he never saw laurette again.
there was a girl named bonnie. she clapped him on the back one day while he was
sitting in louie's drug store near the bakery having a coke. she slapped him on the back
and she said to him you're joe bonham ain't you joe bon-ham from shale city? well i'm
bonnie flannigan we used to go to school together jesus it's good to see somebody from
god's country. he looked at her and he couldn't remember her at all. oh yes he said i
remember you. she nodded and said you were ahead of me in school and you never
would give me a tumble how are you and why don't you come over to see me sometime?
i live in the bungalow court just three doors from the bakery. you work in the bakery i
know. i see some of the guys once in a while sweet guys all of them they told me you
were there.
he looked at her and he could tell she was younger than him and he could tell what
she was. he felt a little pain in his stomach because girls like that might come from new
york or chicago or st. louis or cincinnati they might come from denver or salt lake or
boise idaho or seattle but they never came from shale city because shale city was
home.
he went over to see her. she wasn't a small girl and she wasn't a very cute girl but
she was awfully good natured and she was busy with plans for the future and she was full
of life. i been married three times already said bonnie i been married three times and all
my husbands said i looked just like evelyn nesbitt thaw. do you think i look like evelyn
nesbitt thaw?
in the mornings around five or six o'clock sometimes they would go over to main
street for breakfast over in the bright cheap shiny white tiled restaurants where you could
get anything for a dime. they would go there and the place would be filled with sleepy
sailors wondering what to do now that it was morning and bonnie would know them all.
she would slap them on the shoulders as they walked toward their booth and she would
call them by name. hi pete well if it ain't old slimy hi dick well if it ain't old george.
when they got to the booth and ordered their ham and eggs she would say to him joe if
you're a smart guy you'll stick with me. you want to go through school huh? joe you stick
with me. i'll send you through school. i make the fleet and i know all these guys and i
know where their pocketbooks are and i'm smart and careful i never even had clap you
stick with me joe and we'll wear diamonds. see that guy over there? he always says i
look just like evelyn nesbitt thaw do you think i look like evelyn nesbitt thaw dearie?
there was a girl named lucky. she was the statue of liberty and aunt jemima and
the girl-you-left-behind to about a half a million doughboys in paris. they had a regular
american house in paris and when they were on leave there when they were away from
the trenches and the killing all the guys went to the american house and talked to
american girls and drank american whiskey and were happy.
lucky was the best one of the bunch the nicest and about the smartest. she would
receive him in her room and she would be stark naked with a great red scar where somebody
had yanked her appendix. he would come into her room pretty tired at the end of a
night and maybe a little drunk and he would lie down on her bed and put his hands
behind his head and watch lucky. the minute she saw him she would smile and go over
to her dresser and out of the top drawer she would bring a doily. she was always
crocheting on that doily. she would sit at the foot of the bed all brightness and gossip and
friendliness and crochet the doily and talk to him.
lucky had a son. he was six maybe seven years old and lucky was keeping him in a
school on long island. she was going to raise him to be a polo player because polo
players got around and they met all the best people and nothing was too good for lucky's
son he was such a cute little bastard. figuring out the house percentage and towel
expenses and medical care lucky still made herself from a hundred fifty to two hundred
dollars a week at two dollars apiece. but of course we live it up we got to dress up to our
positions it costs lots in clothes i can tell you but a girl's got to look smart.
lucky had been in the san francisco earthquake. she must have been sixteen or
seventeen then and that would make her almost thirty now. when the earthquake hit san
francisco lucky was on the fourth floor of a hotel on market street. i was entertaining a
gentleman friend and when i first felt that thing hit i said to myself lucky i said that's an
earthquake and you ain't going to be caught dead with no son-of-a-bitch on top of you. so
i pushed him off and i run right down into the street stark naked and you should of seen
the guys stare.
to talk with lucky to be with lucky to lie with lucky was like finding peace in a
heathen country it was like breathing the air of a place you love when you're sick and
dying for a breath of it. to see her smile to hear her bright chatter to watch her bony little
fingers fly as they worked the crochet needle with the night noises of paris a foreign city
just outside the window was enough to make anybody feel better and less lonely.
paris was a strange city a foreign city a dying city a lively city. it had too much life
and too much death and too many ghosts and behind the bars of the cafes too many dead
soldiers. have a drink. oh paris is a woman's town with flowers in her hair. no doubt
about it paris was a wonderful town a woman's town but it was also a man's town. ten
thousand doughboys tommies poilus on leave ten thousand a hundred thousand of them.
a few days boys a few days and then you go back and each time you go back the chances
are more against you than they were the last time. remember that there is a law of
averages so come on dearie turn a trick five francs ten francs two dollars oh boy what's
that an american voice? me for her. what the hell a song in the parlor and a swig of
cheap cognac and let's go because out there in the east the place they call the western
front there is a little old guy keeps a book and figures averages all day long and all night
long he never makes a mistake. flor da lee. flor da lee. god save the king. come on up
honeybunch lonesome wanta try something new parley vous fransays? a gallon of red
wine like water and sourdough bread and maybe please god i find an american girl who
don't talk heathen languages. jig-jig hell that's not what i want. i want something loud
because there is a voice i want to drown out. it's a voice that doesn't make any sound but
i can't get away from it.
somewhere it is being prepared. somewhere deep in the heart of germany the shell
is being made. some german girl is polishing it right now polishing it and cleaning it
and fitting the charge into it. it glistens in the factory light and it has a number and the
number is mine. i have a date with the shell. we shall meet soon.
motor lorries rumbling through the street gathering guys up outside gathering up the
late ones saying come on buddy time's up down to the station and jump on the old box
car. because you're going back. back -to the little old guy who figures out there the guy
who figures all day long and all night long and never makes a mistake. the stars and
stripes forever ta-da da-de-um and da-de-ah. try it kid it's good some guys say it's got
dope in it don't believe a thing they tell you. some guys say it dries you out. it's called
absinthe let it filter down in your glass it's swell. parley vous parley vous yes sir no sir
lonesome honey where's that american voice? god i'd like to find her. where's jack
where's bill where's john gone all gone. gone west. taps. ten thousand dollars for the
folks back home. ten thousand simoleons jesus. i know a house on rue blondel black
and white all nations. americans? sure anything you want oh god that isn't what i want
what i want's a long long way off but i'll take whatever you got. it's a long way to
tipperary. lights out.
nearer nearer. some top-heavy canvas-covered german truck is plunging toward
france right now. in it are shells and among the shells the one with my number. it's
coming toward the west through the rhine valley i always wanted to see it through the
black forest 1 always wanted to see it through the deep deep night coming toward
france the shell i shall meet. it's coming nearer and nearer nothing can stop it not even
the hand of god for i have a time set and it has a time set and we shall meet when the
time comes.
america expects every man to do his duty france expects every man to do his duty
england expects every man to do his duty every doughboy and tommy and poilu and
what the hell did they call the italians? anyhow they're expected to do their duty too.
lafayette we come and so in flanders fields the poppies blow between the crosses row on
row check off the rows for the little old guy with the book the little old guy who figures
all day long and all night long and never makes a mistake. oui oui parley vous jig-jig?
sure jig-jig what the hell five francs ten francs who says two dollars two good old
american dollars and a glass of corn whiskey? my god this cognac i always thought it
was a swell drink i heard so much about it it's terrible give me corn and what do you
think of the prohibitionists? four million of us gone four million votes i suppose we don't
count they'll ruin us yet let's go out and hunt corn good old american corn. darling honey
deary sweet tired lonesome wanta friend take a table take a chair take a bed only don't
take too long there's lots of guys paris is full of them so don't take too long.
hidden beneath some gentle rolling hill that is like a woman's breast on the solid
flesh of the land hidden under the hill in some unknown ammunition dump is my shell. it
is ready. hurry boy hurry doughboy don't be late finish whatever you have to do you
haven't much time left.
sing a rag-time jig-jig sing a rag-time mam'selle sing a hot time in the old town
tonight. sing a joan of arc and a flor da lee sing a mademoiselle from armentieres. sing
a lafayette parley vous fransays. get up and jump jump mighty fast make the smoke
whirl in the air smash the chairs smash the windows tear down the house goddam it move
boy move girl put cognac in your joints and turn the lights out and beat the drums and get
out of the trenches by christmas and see paris by night and turn a trick for five francs and
oui-oui parley vous hunky-dory corn in my belly and a little old guy with a book who
figures all day long and all night long and he figures faster and faster faster and quicker
harder and stronger and faster faster faster.
it will come with a rush and a roar and a shudder. it will come howling and laughing
and shrieking and moaning. it will come so fast you can't help yourself you will stretch
out your arms to embrace it. you will feel it before it comes and you will tense yourself
for acceptance and the earth which is your eternal bed will tremble at the moment of
your union.
silence.
what's this what's this oh my god can a man ever get lower can a man ever be less?
weariness and gasping convulsive exhaustion. all life dead all life wasted and
becoming nothing less than nothing only the germ of nothing. a kind of sickness that
comes from shame. a weakness like dying weakness and faintness and a prayer. god give
me rest take me away hide me let me die oh god how weary how much already dead how
much gone and going oh god hide me and give me peace.
chapter 15
he kept on tapping.
he kept on now for another reason aside from the simple desire to speak which had
started him out. he kept on tapping because he didn't dare stop he didn't dare think. he
didn't have the courage to ask himself even so simple a question as how long will it be
before the nurse understands what i am doing? because he knew it might be months it
might be years it might be all the rest of his life. all the rest of his life to be tapping when
the merest whisper—one word with the syllables barely formed by two lips—when that
was all he needed to tell what he wanted.
there were times when he knew he was stark raving crazy only from the outside he
realized he must seem as he always had seemed. anyone looking down at him would
have no way of suspecting that beneath the mask and the mucus there lay insanity as
naked and cruel and desperate as insanity could ever be. he understood insanity he knew
all about it now. he understood the overpowering impulse to kill without having a reason
for killing the desire to beat against living skulls until they were pulp the passion to
strangle the lust for murder that was more beautiful more satisfying more imperative than
any lust he had known before. but he couldn't do it he couldn't kill he couldn't do
anything but tap.
inside his skull there was a normal man with arms and legs and everything that goes
with them. it was he joe bonham trapped in the darkness of his own skull rushing
frantically from ear-hole to ear-hole wherever in the skull there might be an opening.
like a wild animal he was trying to hammer his way out to escape into the world beyond.
he was trapped in his own brain tangled in the tissues and brain-matter kicking and
gouging and screaming to get out. and the only person in the world who could help him
had no idea of what he was doing.
he got to thinking this nurse is keeping me a prisoner. she is keeping me more
securely a prisoner than any jailer than any chain than any stone wall they could ever
build around me. he got to thinking of all the prisoners he had ever read about or heard
about all the little guys from the beginning of the doing of things who had been caught
and imprisoned and who had died without ever becoming free again. he thought of the
slaves little guys like himself who had been captured in war who had spent the rest of
their lives chained like animals to oars rowing some big guy's ship through the
mediterranean sea. he thought of them down there in the deeps of the ship never
knowing where they were going never smelling the outer air never feeling anything
except the oar in their hands and the shackles on their legs and the whip that lashed their
backs when they grew tired. he thought of them all the shepherds and farmers and clerks
and little shopkeepers who had suddenly been taken away from their way of living who
had been cast into the ships and had stayed there away from their homes and their
families and their native parts until finally they collapsed at their oars and died and were
thrown out into the sea for the first time to touch fresh air and clean water. he thought of
them and he thought they were luckier than i am they could move they could see each
other they were more nearly living than i and they were not imprisoned as securely.
he thought of the slaves deep under the street levels of carthage before the romans
came and destroyed the city. he remembered from some time way back in the past how
he had read of the carthaginian slaves and what they did and how they were treated. how
the great carthaginian lords wanting someone to guard their treasure stores would find a
healthy young man and put out his eyes with sharp sticks so he wouldn't be able to see
where they took him and thus learn the location of their treasures. then they would take
him poor blinded young guy down into the passages under the level of the streets to the
door of the treasure house. there they chained one arm and one leg to the door and one
arm and one leg to the wall so that for anyone to enter the seal would have to be broken
and the seal was the living breathing body of a man. he thought of the carthaginian
slaves down in the darkness blinded and chained and he thought they were lucky guys.
they died soon there was no one there to take care of them to make sure the breath of life
stayed in their bodies as long as possible. they were in agony but they died soon and
even in their agony they could stand on two legs they could pull against their chains.
they could hear and when someone spoke some great noble coming down into the
treasure house they could hear the blessed sound of a human voice.
he thought of the slaves who built the pyramids thousands of them tens of thousands
of them spending their whole lives to put up a dead monument to a dead king. he thought
of the slaves who fought each other in the coliseum in rome for the entertainment of big
guys who sat in the boxes and held their thumbs up or down to give the slaves life or
death. he thought of the slaves when they disobeyed— ears lopped off hands hacked
away screaming tongues flexed with cries for mercy even as they were pulled out by the
roots so that no secrets would be betrayed. little guys all over the world shot drowned
stabbed crucified boiled in oil whipped to death burned at the stake—all these things
were the fate of slaves the fate of the little guy the fate of men like himself. only the
slaves could always die but he couldn't and he was mutilated far beyond any slave who
ever lived. yet he was one of them he was part of them he too was a slave. he too had
been taken away from his home. he too had been put into the service of another without
his consent. he too had been sent to a foreign country far from his native parts. he too
had been forced to fight against other slaves of his own kind in a strange place. he too
had been mutilated and branded forever. he too was at last a prisoner in the narrowest
cell of them all the cell of his own horrible body awaiting only the relief of death.
god help us he thought god help us all the slaves. for hundreds and thousands of
years we have been tapping we slaves tapping away from the depths of our prisons. all of
us all of the little guys all the slaves from the beginning of time tapping tapping tappinga
man had come into the room a man with heavy footsteps. the man came over to
the bed and threw the covers back and began to prod his body. it was the doctor. he could
imagine the nurse going for the doctor and saying that thing up there in the room that
thing is always tapping its head. i get nervous i think it needs something. come and look
at it come and try to stop its tapping. so the doctor had come and now he was prodding
him. when the prodding was over the doctor took the tube from his throat and he had a
little fit of strangling like he always had when they took the tube out to clean it. the
doctor put the tube back in its hole and stood quietly doing nothing.
all during this he kept up his tapping and now that the doctor was quiet he tapped
much harder. it was just possible that the doctor might understand what he was trying to
do. he felt the vibration of the doctor's footsteps moving over toward the dresser then
coming back again. he felt a cold wet thing against the stump of his left arm. then he felt
a sharp little sting a sharp little pain like a needle and he knew the doctor was injecting
something into his arm.
before he began to feel its effects he knew it was some kind of dope. they were
trying to shut him up. they had been trying all along they knew perfectly well what he
was doing nobody with any brains could fail to know. and he knew what they were doing
too. they were plotting against him out there in the darkness. they had tried every way
on earth to make him be still but he had out-fought them he had kept right on tapping. so
now they were doping him. they were forcing him to be silent. they didn't want to hear
him. they weren't interested in anything but getting him off their minds. he shook his
head frantically to try to to tell them that he didn't want to be doped. then the needle was
withdrawn and he knew it didn't matter whether he wanted it or not.
he determined to keep on with his tapping in spite of them to try to strengthen his
will to such a point that even as the drug overcame him even as he fell completely asleep
from its effects the strength of bis will would carry over into his sleep and he would
continue the tapping just as you turn on a machine and it continues to operate after you
have gone away.
but a fog settled down over his mind a numbness took possession of his flesh so that
it seemed that each time he lifted his head from the pillow he was lifting some enormous
weight. the weight grew heavier the tapping grew slower his flesh became like the flesh
of a dead person his mind seemed to shrink and shrivel as the drowsiness swept over it. in
his last moment of thinking he was saying to himself they've won again but they can't win
forever they can't forever oh no not forever ...
chapter 16
things began slowly to change to go in wide hazy circles to dissolve into one another. it
seemed that he was relaxing in every muscle of his body relaxing in his brain. the bed
felt softer than it had ever been before. the pillow at the back of his head was like a
pillow of cloud. the covers across his stomach and chest were covers of silk of cobweb
of soft warm air. there was nothing below him nor above him nor to his right nor to his
left. his skin went limp and lazy against his flesh and even his blood seemed at rest not
pumping through his heart any more but lying warm and liquid and still in his veins.
and yet in the midst of this enormous quiet there was movement. this perfectly still
thing which was him his body and his mind was moving slowly through a windless
world. only it wasn't the world. it was simply space a kind of glowing space through
which he was moving whether slowly or rapidly he couldn't tell because there was no air
to stir at his passing. it was the kind of motion a star must make a star without
atmosphere or life as it completes its steady circle through nothingness.
and there were colors everywhere. not rough nor violent colors but the kind of
shadings the sky takes on at sunrise the pinks and blues and lavenders of the inside of a
seashell suddenly grown bigger than the sky and everything in it. the colors floated
toward him floated into him dissolved through the particles of his body and then passed
on to make way for more colors more and more and more so wonderful so beautiful so
big. there were cool colors sweet smelling colors colors that made faint high music as
they passed through him. he could hear the music everywhere and yet it wasn't loud. it
was a kind of music that seemed to be so thin it was scarcely sound at all. it was simply a
part of space a sound that was the same thing as space and color a sound that was nothing
at all and at the same time more real than flesh and blood and steel. the music was so
sweet so tinkling high that it seemed a part of him just as much a part as the little fibres of
his body. the music was like a white ghost in the daytime. he and space and the colors
and the music were the same thing. his body had drifted into them like smoke into the
sky and now he like them was a portion of time.
then the music stopped and there was silence. it wasn't the simple silence that
sometimes comes when you are in the world the silence which is merely the absence of
noise. it wasn't even the silence that comes to deaf people. it was something like the
silence you hear when you put a seashell to your ear the silence of time itself that is so
great it makes a noise. it was a silence like thunder in the distance. it was silence so dense
that it ceased to be silence. it changed from a thing to a thought and in the end it was only
fear.
he hung there in the silence waiting for the thing to happen. he didn't know what the
thing would be but he knew it would happen. it was as if he had already seen the puff of
smoke from a dynamite charge and now was waiting for the sound. then the silence was
shattered by his fall. his breath was forced back into his lungs from the pressure of the air
through which he fell. he was falling a million times faster than a shooting star falling
faster than light travels falling through ten thousand years and ten thousand worlds with
things becoming louder and faster and more terrible. great round globes bigger than the
sun bigger than the whole milky way came at him so fast they might have been cards
shuffled through a pack. they came at him and hit him full in the face and burst like soap
bubbles to make way for the next and the next. his brain was working so fast that he had
time to flinch for each one and after it had burst to prepare himself for the shock of the
next.
he began to whirl faster than the propeller of an airplane and the whirling made
noises in his head. he heard voices all the voices in the world voices that had arms and
legs voices that reached out to grab him and voices that kicked as he sped by. things
went so fast before his eyes that he could see nothing but light. when he saw the light he
,knew that nothing was real because real things make shadows and shut out light.
and then all sound seemed centered in one voice that filled the whole world. he
listened to the voice because it had stopped his fall. it had become everything—the world
and the universe and the nothingness around them. it was a woman's voice crying and he
had heard it before.
where's my boy where's my boy? he's under age can't you see? he just came up
from tucson about a week ago. they had him in jail for a tramp and i came all the way
here to get him back. they let him out of jail if he'd join the army. he's only sixteen
except he's big and strong for his age he always was. he's too young i tell you he's just a
baby. where is he my little boy? he just came up from tucson you see and i came to take
him home.
the voice faded away but he knew the whole thing now. that boy was christ. there
wasn't any doubt about it. the boy was christ and he had come up from tucson and now
his mother was hunting and crying for him. he could see christ coming up from tucson
trembling out of the desert heat waves with purple robes flowing from him like in a
mirage. christ came right into the railway station and sat down with them.
it seemed like there must be a little room somewhere off from the station and they
were playing blackjack there waiting for the train to go. he didn't know the other guys
and they didn't know him but it didn't seem to make any difference. outside the crowds
were yelling and the bands were playing and here he was with four or five guys in a quiet
little room and they were playing blackjack when christ came up from tucson and
walked in on them. the guy with red hair looked up and said you play blackjack? and
christ said sure and the guy who looked like a swede said then pull up a chair. table
stakes said the guy with red hair and be sure your bet's out before the first card. christ
said okay and fished around in his pocket and pulled out a quarter and laid it down.
the guy with red hair began to deal and everybody began to watch the cards except
the swede who grunted and said christ i wish we had a drink here. christ kind of grinned
and said why don't you drink it if you want it so bad? the guy who looked like a swede
turned and looked at christ and then he looked down at the table and sure enough there
was a glass of whiskey sitting by his right hand and everybody had a drink of whiskey
sitting there. they all looked up at christ and the guy with red hair said how in hell did
you do that? christ just smiled and said i can do anything hit me only not too hard. the
dealer hit him and christ looked at the card like it was bad news. then he pushed his
money toward the dealer. i never could hit a twelve he said in a complaining voice. i
don't understand it because a twelve shouldn't be any harder to hit than a thirteen should
it? it shouldn't be only it is said the guy with red hair. there is nothing to that it's all the
bunk said the guy who looked like a swede a twelve is just like any other number above
it only better and anybody tells you any different is filled with superstition. gosh said a
quiet little guy who had been winning and now was sampling the whiskey this stuff is
mighty good liquor try it. it ought to be good said christ still looking at his dough out
there on the table it's sixteen years old.
all of a sudden the guy with red hair threw down his cards and stood up stretching
and yawning. well he said it's all aboard outside i got to go. we all got to go. i'm going to
be killed on the twenty-seventh of june and i got to say goodbye to my wife and kid. the
kid he's only a year eight months but smart as hell already i'd like to see him when he's
five. i can see myself getting killed plain. it's just after daybreak all cool and nice with a
brand new sun and the air smelling good. we're going over and i'm a sergeant by then so i
go over first. just as i get my head over the edge a bullet hits me like a hammer. i fall
back clear across the trench and try to tell the other guys to go on without me only i can't
talk and they go over anyhow. i lie there seeing only their legs as they run by and climb
up and disappear. i kick and squirm for a minute like a chicken and then i snuggle down
against the dirt. that bullet got me in the throat so i just snuggle down there peaceful like
and watch the blood run out and then i'm dead. but my wife don't know it so i got to tell
her goodbye just like i thought i was coming back.
hell said the little guy who had been winning you talk like you was the only one.
we're all going to be killed that's why we're here. christ he's already dead and the big
swede over there is going to catch flu and die in camp and you in the corner you're going
to get blown so damned high nobody'll ever have a souvenir and me i'm going to get
buried in a trench cave-in and smother now isn't that a hell of a way to die?
all of a sudden they were all quiet listening and the guy with red hair said what's
that? somewhere in the air way far above them there was music. it was high thin music
like a ghost passing through the sunlight. it was pale white music so beautiful so very
faint and yet loud enough for all of them to hear. it was music like a soft breeze that finds
it way out beyond the place where there is air where there is only space. it was music so
faint so shivery so sweet that it made them all tremble as they stood and listened. it is the
music of death said christ the high thin music of death.
everybody was still for a minute and then the little guy who had been winning said
what the hell's this other guy doing here he ain't going to die. and then everybody looked
at him. for a minute he didn't know what to say he felt like somebody who's come to a
party he hasn't any invitation to and then he cleared his throat and said maybe you're right
but i'm going to be the same as dead. you see i'm going to have my arms and legs blown
off and my face shot out so i can't see or hear or talk or breathe and i'm going to live even
if i am dead.
they all looked at him and finally the guy who looked like a swede said jesus he's
worse off than we are. there was a little more silence and all of them seemed to be
looking at the guy with red hair as if he was the boss. hell said the guy with red hair after
staring hard at him he's all right leave him alone. so they all went out to the train.
on the way out to the train the little guy who had been winning said to christ christ
are you going with us? and christ said for a little ways but not far i got lots of trains to
meet lots of dead men lots of them you wouldn't believe it. so they climbed on the train
and christ made just an easy little jump and swung right smack up on top of the engine.
when the train started up everybody thought it was the train's whistle made the noise but
it wasn't it was christ perched up there and screaming that made the noise. so the train
went rushing and screaming away with christ perched on top of the engine his clothes
trailing after him and hollering at the top of his voice. the train went so fast all you could
see looking out of the window was a line between the sky and the earth and nothing else.
pretty soon the train was in the middle of a big desert a hot yellow desert that
shivered under the sun. away off in the distance there was a cloud—a haze that was
floating between the sky and the earth but nearer to the earth. and out of the haze was
christ coming up from tucson. christ floated there above the desert with purple robes
drifting down and the heat waves swimming up around him.
looking at christ there above the desert he couldn't stand it any longer on the train.
dead men were on that train dead men or live men and he wasn't either so he had no
business being there. he had no business being anywhere there was no place for him he
was forgotten and abandoned and left forever alone. so he jumped out of the train right
through the window and started running toward christ.
the nightmare train went on through the sunlight its whistle screeching and the dead
men inside laughing. but he was alone in the desert running running till his lungs
squeaked running toward christ who floated there in the heat with purple robes. he ran
and he ran and he ran and finally he came up to christ. he threw himself into the hot sand
at the feet of christ and began to cry.
chapter 17
he awakened as a man awakens out of a drunk—hazy-brained and foggy swimming
slowly and painfully back toward reality. he awakened tapping with his head against his
pillow. the tapping by now had become so much a part of awakening that the first
glimmer of consciousness found him already tapping and later on when exhaustion
overcame him and his mind began to grow dim and sleep crept over his body he was still
tapping. he lay there not thinking of anything his brain aching and throbbing and his
head tapping against the pillow. sos. help.
and then as his mind sharpened and began to think instead of only to feel he stopped
his tapping and lay still. something very important was happening. he had a new day
nurse.
he could tell it the minute the door opened and she began to walk across the room.
her footsteps were light where those of his regular day nurse his old efficient fastworking
day nurse were heavy. it took five steps to bring this new one to his bedside.
that meant she was shorter than the regular nurse and probably younger too because the
very vibration of her footsteps seemed gay and buoyant. it was the first time within his
memory that the regular day nurse had not appeared to take care of him.
he lay very still very tense. this was like learning a new secret like opening a new
world. without a moment's hesitation the new nurse threw back his covers. and then like
all of the others before her she stood quietly for a moment beside his bed. he knew she
was staring down at him. he knew she must have been told what to expect. yet the sight
of him was probably so much worse than any description that she could do nothing for
that first instant but stare. then instead of hastily throwing the covers back over him as
some of them did or running out of the room or standing and weeping and letting the
tears fall against his chest she put her hand against his forehead. no one had ever done it
before hi just this way. perhaps no one had been able to do it. it was like putting a hand
near an open cancer something so terrible and sickening that no one could endure the
thought much less the action. yet this new nurse this nurse with the light happy step was
not afraid.
she put her hand to his forehead and he felt that her hand was young and small and
moist. she put her hand to his forehead and he tried to ripple his skin to show her how
much he appreciated the way she had done it. it was like resting after a long long period
of work. it was almost like sleep it was so lovely and soothing to have her hand against
his head.
then he began to think of the possibilities of this new nurse. for some reason the old
one was gone. the old, one had never understood what he was trying to do had never
understood that he was trying with every ounce of his strength to talk to her. she had paid
no attention at all to his tapping except to try to stop it. but she was gone and in her place
he had a new nurse a young new nurse who was unafraid and gentle. how long he would
have her no one could tell. she might leave the room and never come back again. but for
the moment he had her and he knew that somehow she felt as he felt or she couldn't have
put her hand so quickly to his forehead. if he could tap very firmly very clearly very
plainly to her she might understand what no one else had considered worth trying to
understand. she might understand that he was talking. the old nurse might return and he
might never hear the footsteps of the new one again. if this new one went his last chance
would go with her. he would go on through the rest of his life tapping tapping tapping
with no one understanding that he was trying to work a miracle. the new nurse was his
reprieve his one tiny opportunity in all the hours and weeks and years of his life.
he stiffened the muscles of his neck and prepared once more to start tapping his head
against the pillow. but another strange thing was happening to arrest him. she had
opened his nightshirt so that his breast was now naked to the air. she was moving the tip
of her finger against the skin of his breast. for a moment he was merely puzzled unable
to understand what she was doing. then by concentrating all of his mind on the skin of
his breast he began to understand that her finger was not travelling aimlessly. it was
making a design against his skin. it was making the same design over and over again. he
knew there was some purpose behind such repetition and he grew tense and alert to discover
it. like an eager dog spoken to by its master and trying very hard to be good and to
understand he lay stiffly and concentrated on the design the nurse was making.
the first thing he noted about the design was that it had no curves. it was all straight
lines and angles. it began with a straight line moving up and then it went down at an
angle and then it came up again at an angle and then it went straight down and stopped.
she repeated the design over and over now slowly now rapidly now slowly again. some-
times she paused at the finish of the design and with the strange understanding that
seemed to have sprung up between them he knew that her pauses were question marks
that she was looking down at him and asking him if he understood and waiting for his
response.
each time she paused he shook his head and then she repeated the design once more
and in the midst of this patient repetition the barrier between them suddenly broke down.
with one quick rush of comprehension he understood what she was doing. she was
tracing the letter m against the skin of his breast. he nodded quickly to tell her that he
understood and she patted his forehead encouragingly as if to say you are remarkable you
are wonderful how hard you try and how quickly you learn. then she began to trace other
letters.
the others came easier because he now understood what she was doing. he
tightened the skin of his chest so that he could better receive the impression of her finger.
some of the letters she had to do only once he was so quick at getting them. he got the
letter e and he nodded and the letter r and he nodded and again the r and then he got the
letter y and he nodded and there was a long pause. the rest of the letters tumbled into his
mind in a perfect torrent. there was c and h and r and i and s and t and m and a and s
and the whole thing spelled merry christmas.
merry christmas merry christmas merry christmas.
now he understood. the old nurse had left to spend the christmas holidays away
from him and this new nurse this young lovely beautiful understanding new nurse was
wishing him merry christmas. he nodded back at her frantically and his nod meant merry
christmas to you merry christmas oh a merry merry christmas.
he thought to himself with a kind of hysterical happiness four years maybe five
maybe six years i don't know how many years but i've been alone through all of them. he
thought all my good work is gone all my way of keeping time has been forgotten but i
don't care i am no longer alone. the years and years and years that he had been alone and
now for the first time someone breaking through someone talking to him someone saying
merry christmas. it was like a dazzling white light in the midst of darkness. it was like a
great beautiful sound in the midst of silence. it was like an enormous laugh in the midst
of death. it was christmas and someone had broken through and was wishing him merry
christmas.
he heard the sound of sleigh bells and the crunch of snow and he saw candles in
windows shining out upon the snow warm and yellow and there were wreaths of holly
with red berries nestling like hot coals against them and there was a clear sky overhead
with clean blue-white little stars and there was a feeling of peace and joy and relief
because it was christmas. he had been taken back into the world. merry christmas merry
christmas merry christmas.
twas the night before christmas and all through the house not a creature was
stirring not even a mouse. the stockings were hung by the chimney with care in the hope
that saint nicholas soon would be there . . .
in every christmas eve since he could remember his mother had read the poem. even
after he was much too old to believe in santa claus even after he was a man maybe
sixteen or seventeen years old still she read the poem on christmas eve. in the beginning
when they were all together it was a wonderful thing to hear her read it. they gathered in
the living room of the house in shale city every christmas eve before going to bed to
listen to his mother read the poem. his father would have been working late at the store
filling last minute christmas orders but at ten o'clock the store closed and his father came
home. it was snowy and cold outside but the living room was always very snug and the
pot-bellied coal-burning stove would be glowing a warm dusty red around its base.
elizabeth being very young would be asleep in her bed but catherine would be there
and his father and mother and himself. catherine would be in her nightgown her
discarded clothes in a heap near the stove so they would be warm when she scrambled
into them on christmas morning. they had no fireplace so the back of a chair served for a
mantel. hung on the chair were all of their stockings his father's his mother's elizabeth's
tiny little baby stocking catherine's and his own. his father would be sitting back in the
morris chair and catherine would be snuggled against his legs. his mother would be in
another chair with the opened book before her. why his mother read the poem from a
book no one could imagine except that it was a custom because they all knew it by heart.
he would be on the floor huddled up with his hands around his legs staring at the door of
the stove where the flames leaped behind ising-glass windows.
the moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow gave a lustre of midday to objects
below when what to my wandering eyes should appear but a miniature sleigh and eight
tiny reindeer . . .
none of them ever forgot the poem. they could recite the whole thing any time of
the year because it was the poem of christmas. as they listened to the poem it seemed
that a delicious air of mystery stole over the room. each member of the family had a little
cache of gifts hidden somewhere in the house away from the others. it was very
dishonorable for anyone to snoop on the day before christmas so no one ever did but
there was no harm in speculating upon where the gifts might be hidden.
his mother's face as she read seemed to take on a warm happy glow. she was there
in her own house with her family around her and they were all alive and it was christmas
eve and she was reading the poem she always read. it was so warm so secure so
comforting to be home on christmas eve to be in a nice room with a good stove to feel
somehow that here was a place in the wilderness a place forever safe a place that could
never be changed could never be harmed could never be intruded upon. and now ... he
wondered about his mother tonight ... his father gone and him away and it being
christmas eve again. he wondered if somewhere in the world his mother at this moment
might not be reading the poem. he could almost hear her voice thrill with excitement as
she came to the climax.
now dasher now dancer now prancer and vixen—on comet on cupid on dunder
and blitzen—to the top of the porch to the top of the wall now dash away dash away
dash away all . . .
catherine's brown eyes were staring out now from her refuge by her father's legs
staring out soberly yet glowing with little lights of excitement. a film had come over his
father's eyes as if he had withdrawn a little and was imagining the scene in his own
grown-up way. his mother's face was animated her voice triumphant as she came to the
thrilling part where santa claus slid down the chimney and nodded and set to work with
his fat little belly shaking with laughter. and then where he put a finger to the side of his
nose gave a nod and up the chimney arose. then up to the roof where one almost could
hear the scraping of the reindeer's little feet eager to be off to the next house.
he sprang to his sleigh to his team gave a whistle and away they all flew like down
from a thistle. but i heard him exclaim ere he drove out of sight merry christmas to all
and to all a good night . . .
they always sat quietly for a moment as his mother's voice died away. nobody said
a word because there was still something more to come. his mother laid aside the book of
poems and reached for another book. she had a marker in the bible and she opened it now
to the place that was marked and began to read again. she read the story of the little
christ-child of the baby jesus and how he was born in a manger and how the star shone
over bethlehem and how the wise men traveled to him and how all the angels of heaven
came near to the earth that night to sing of peace and the christ-child and good will
toward men.
he could hear her voice reading it off softly and reverently with the words coming
like music from her lips. it was a funny thing he'd never read the bible story of christmas
himself. he had only heard it as his mother read it to him. he couldn't remember the
words but he could still see the pictures that used to come into his mind as his mother
read. he knew the story by heart.
all the people were going to bethlehem because it was tax time and they had to
appear at the court house and register and pay up. they had been pouring in all day long
and now it was night and the town was filled. among those coming in was a man by the
name of joseph who was a carpenter in the town of nazareth.
joseph had to do a lot of chores before he could start out and mary his wife was
pregnant and couldn't help him so they were late. it was already dark by the time they
came to the outskirts of bethlehem. joseph was leading their donkey and mary poor
wide-eyed girl was riding it and hoping they'd get settled soon because she was already
feeling her pains and knew they didn't have much time. it was her first baby and she
wasn't quite sure what to do when the time came.
as soon as they got into the town joseph began making the rounds of cheap rooming
houses. he wasn't much of a success at making money and they only had enough to pay
their taxes and one night's rent. they went from rooming house to rooming house with
mary getting more frightened as her pains increased but the rooming houses were all
filled because there were plenty of poor people even then and they had all beaten joseph
to the bargain places. finally they counted their money and joseph decided they would
try the hotel. they could get a back bedroom and maybe he could do a little work around
the place in the morning if their money didn't quite stretch out.
but the hotel was filled too.
then joseph began to talk very seriously to the hotel manager. see here he said i've
come a long way and i've got my wife with me and she's going to have a baby. look at
her out there on the donkey you see she's just a kid and she's scared. she shouldn't have
come in the first place only i couldn't leave her alone and i couldn't get anybody to stay
with her overnight because they're all here paying their taxes. i've got to find a place for
her to sleep and that's all there is to it.
the hotel manager looked out into the darkness and saw mary's white anxious face
there. she's a pretty kid he thought and scared too like her husband says. it'll be an awful
mess if she has a baby on the premises people who can't afford them shouldn't have
babies anyway but what are you going to do about it? all right he said to joseph i guess i
can find a place for you. see that passageway over there? well go right on through it and
you'll come to the barn. there's a manger at the far end. i'll have one of the boys throw
down some hay and it'll be comfortable. i don't mind telling you i hope very much she
doesn't have her baby here tonight because it'll upset my guests if she screams and they're
all very high-class people including three roman congressmen. but go ahead.
joseph said thanks and started off toward mary. oh i almost forgot yelled the hotel
keeper after him don't light any fires out there in the barn because in my insurance it says
they're forbidden and i can't afford to have my insurance cancelled. joseph hollered that
he would be careful and the hotel keeper went back into the warm and stood in front of
the fire and thought it's a shame people having kids all over the place it's good and chilly
tonight too i do hope she doesn't make a fuss.
back in the manger joseph lighted a lantern and fixed up a nice bed on the hay and
mary lay down on the bed and had her baby. it was a boy. they wrapped it up in a
blanket they had brought especially for it and mary who was a good strong girl held the
baby real tight against her. i was almost sure it would be a boy she said to joseph. what
are we going to name it? joseph asked her. i think i would like to name it jesus she said.
she looked quickly down at the baby and back to joseph the fright all gone from her eyes
and a smile on her lips.
but joseph staring down at the two of them didn't smile. mary noticed this and said
joseph what's the matter you don't look happy it's a fine baby look at its chubby hands
why don't you smile? and joseph said there's a light around the head of our baby a shine
that is soft like moonlight. mary nodded as if she weren't a bit surprised and said i think
there must be a light like that around the heads of all newborn babies they're so fresh
from heaven. and joseph said in a kind of sick voice as if he had suddenly lost something
there's a light around your head too mary.
out in the hills beyond bethlehem a sheep herder was trying to get a little rest. the
sheep were all lying down and there had been such a hub-bub in bethlehem from so
many people coming from all directions that he was sure the wolves were scared back
into the hills so there wasn't any risk in him getting forty winks. he lay there sleeping
when suddenly he woke up with a light shining in his face. he opened his eyes and
started to look around. for a minute he couldn't see a thing because he was blinded by
starlight. when he finally got himself organized he saw a star hanging low in the sky over
bethlehem a star so near you could almost reach out and touch it and so bright it lighted
the whole town. the walls and house-tops of bethlehem stood out sharp and clear and
white and on the hillside around him he could see his sheep like little lumps of silver
against the earth.
then he heard sounds on the road and looked off to the left. coming around the foot
of the hill where the road turned into bethlehem were three camels with three riders. the
sheep herder could tell by their clothes that they were out-of-staters of some kind. he
could see the silver decorations of their saddles reflecting back the light of the star over
bethlehem. he watched them for a minute thinking that they looked pretty well off to be
having to pay taxes and then he heard the music. the air was filled with angels singing in
the starlight. this night they sang in the town of bethlehem there is born a little baby who
shall be the saviour of the world. he is the prince of peace and the son of god and his
name is jesus. peace on earth and good will toward men. rejoice everyone and sing with
the angels for this night a saviour is born. peace peace peace on earth and good will
toward men.
the sheep herder who was not used to angels singing in the sky above the place he
worked and so knew it must be some kind of a miracle got down on his knees and
lowered his head in prayer. he didn't look up for a long while even though he was afraid
that all the noise might startle his sheep and cause him to spend half the night rounding
them up again.
away off in rome a man in a palace stirred in his sleep. he almost awakened and
then drowsed off again wondering in his dreams why he was nervous. in the manger in
bethlehem mary listened to the angels and didn't seem to feel as happy as when she first
saw her child. she stared right through the wise men who had come with presents. she
hugged her baby closer. her eyes were filled with pain and fear for the little baby.
chapter 18
when he finally forced his mind away from thoughts of christmas of merry christmas he
began to tap once more. only this time he tapped firmly with vigor full of hope and
confidence for he saw that this new nurse this lovely new nurse was thinking as hard as
he was and of the same thing. he knew as plainly as if she had told him that she was determined
to batter down the silence which stood between him as a dead man and him as a
live man. since she had already thought of a way to speak to him he knew that she would
pay attention when he tried to speak to her. the others had been too busy or too tired or
else not bright enough to see what he was doing. they had taken his tapping as a nervous
habit as a disease as the whim of a child as a symptom of insanity as anything but what it
really was as anything but a cry from the darkness a voice from the dead a wail in the
silence for friendship and someone to talk to. but the new nurse would understand and
help him.
he tapped very carefully very slowly to show her that he had a method in what he
was doing. just as she had repeated the design of the letter m on his chest over and over
again so he now tapped his distress signal back to her. but slowly ... so slowly. dot dot
dot dot dot dot dot dot. s o s. h e 1 p. over and over again he repeated it. once in a
while he would stop at the completion of the signal. that was his question mark just as
her pauses had been question marks. he would stop and try to make all that was visible of
him—his hair and half his forehead above the mask—take on an air of expectancy. then
when he received no sign from her he would do it again. and all the while he tapped he
was conscious of her near him watching and thinking.
after a long period of waiting and watching and thinking she began to do things. she
did them very deliberately so deliberately that even her movements seemed thoughtful.
first she slipped the urinal in under the covers touching it against his body so that he
could recognize it. he shook his head. she took the urinal away and slipped the bed pan
against him. he shook his head. she took the bed pan away. there was no hesitation
between her movements now. it seemed that she had each move figured out before she
finished the last one. she was working skillfully and intelligently to eliminate all possible
causes for his tapping one by one with no pauses in between. he knew that during the
time she had stood beside him watching and thinking she had made up her mind to a plan
and now was putting it into effect with as little nonsense as possible.
she took the blanket off him leaving him with only a sheet for covering. he shook
his head. she put the blanket back and threw another one over it to give him more covers
than before. he shook his head. he had stopped tapping now waiting alertly until she was
through with her plan. she took the covers off him entirely and adjusted the position of
the breathing tube in his throat. he shook his head. she patted the bandage over the hole
in his side. he shook his head. he shook his head and marveled that he had the sense left
to do it because he was so charged with excitement that he could scarcely think. she
lifted the nightshirt that covered him and began gently to rub his body. he shook his
head. she threw the covers over him again and moved toward the head of the bed. she
rubbed his forehead soothingly. he shook his head. she smoothed his hair back and
scratched his scalp and massaged it with her knuckles. he shook his head. she loosened
the cord that held the mask over his face. he shook his head. she lifted the mask up and
fanned it gently to let the air in and be sure it wasn't sticking. he shook his head. she
replaced the bandage and stopped everything. he could feel her standing beside the head
of the bed looking down at him attentively as alert and eager as he was himself. she had
done everything she could think of and now she was standing there quietly as if to say it's
your turn now please try hard to tell me and i will try hard to understand.
he began to tap again.
it seemed to him that he stopped breathing. it seemed that his heart stopped and the
blood in 'his body turned solid. it seemed that the only living moving thing in the whole
world was his head as it tapped tapped tapped against his pillow. he knew it was now or
never. there was no good in fooling himself now. this minute this instant this very
second everything was about to be decided. never again would he have a nurse such as
this one. she might turn and walk out of the room in five minutes and never return. when
she walked away she would carry his life with her she would carry madness and
loneliness and all his godforsaken silent screams and she would never know it she would
never hear the screams. she would simply go and ever after he would be forgotten. she
was loneliness and friendship she was life and death and she stood now waiting quietly
for him to tell her what he wanted.
while he tapped he was praying in his heart. he had never paid much attention to
praying before but now he was doing it saying oh please god make her understand what
i'm trying to tell her. i've been alone so long god i've been here for years and years
suffocating smothering dead while alive like a man who has been buried in a casket deep
in the ground and awakens and screams i'm alive i'm alive i'm alive let me out open the
lid dig away the dirt please merciful christ help me only there's no one to hear him and so
he's dead. i know you're very busy god i know there are millions of people praying to you
every minute every hour for something they need i know there are a lot of important
people who are after you for big things that are all tied up with nations and continents and
maybe even the whole world. i know all these things god and i don't blame you if you get
behind on your orders nobody's perfect but what i want is such a little thing. if i were
asking you for something big something like a million dollars or a private yacht or a
skyscraper i could understand if i didn't get it because there are only so many dollars and
so many yachts and so many skyscrapers. but i only want you should take a tiny little
idea that is in my mind and put it into her mind two maybe three feet away. that's all i
want god. the idea is so small so light that a humming bird could carry it a moth a
mayfly the breath of air that comes from the mouth of a baby. it won't take any time and
it means i can't tell you what to me. honestly i wouldn't ask you god only this is such a
little thing. it's such a little thing . . .
he felt her finger against his forehead.
he nodded.
he felt her finger tap four times against his forehead.
that is the letter h he thought only she doesn't know it she's got no idea she's just
tapping there to test if that's what i want.
he nodded.
he nodded so hard his neck ached and his head seemed to whirl. he nodded so hard
the whole bed shook.
oh thank you god he thought she got it you put the idea where i asked you should
thank you. thank you thank you thank you.
he felt her hand pressed against his forehead reassuringly for just a, minute. then he
got the rapidly receding vibrations of her footsteps going away. he knew she was running
from the room to tell them. the door slammed behind her. the sound quivered against his
bedsprings like an electric shock. she was gone.
he lay back surprised to find how exhausted he was. it was like he had worked three
nights in a row at the bakery during the summer when he couldn't get any sleep in the
daytime. the breath was gone out of him and his head throbbed and every muscle in his
body was sore. yet inside he was all confetti and high-flying flags and double-time band
music that marched up and up straight into the face of the sun. he had done it he had
succeeded the thing was accomplished and even though he lay perfectly still perfectly
exhausted it seemed he could see the whole world lying below him. there was no telling
it there was no thinking it there was no imagining it he was so happy.
it was as if all the people in the world the whole two billion of them had been against
him pushing the lid of the coffin down on him tamping the dirt solid against the lid
rearing great stones above the dirt to keep him in the earth yet he had risen. he had lifted
the lid he had thrown away the dirt he had tossed the granite aside like a snowball and
now he was above the surface he was standing in the air he was leaping with every step
miles above the earth. he was like nobody else who had ever lived. he had done so much
he was like god.
the doctors who brought their friends in to see him would no longer say here is a
man who has lived without arms legs ears eyes nose mouth isn't it wonderful? they
would say here is a man who can think here is a man who lay in his bed with only a cut of
meat to hold him together and yet he thought of a way to talk. listen to him speak. you
see his mind is unaffected he speaks like you and me he is a person he has identity he is
part of the world. and he is part of the world only because he all by himself with perhaps
the aid of a prayer and a god figured out a way to speak. look at him and then let us ask
you if this isn't even more wonderful than all the splendid operations we have performed
upon his stump?
he knew now that he had never been really happy in his whole life. there had been
times when he had thought he was happy but none of them were like this. there was the
time when all year long he had wanted an erector set and when at christmas time he got
it. that was probably as happy as he had ever been while he was a kid. there was the
time when kareen told him she loved him and that was as happy as he had ever been up
to the time the shell exploded and blew him out of the world. but this happiness this new
wild frantic happiness was greater than anything he could conceive. it was a thing so
absolute so towering so out of this world that it hit him almost like delirium. his legs that
were smashed and gone got up and danced. his arms that were rotted these five six seven
years swung fantastically free at his sides to keep time with the dance. the eyes they had
taken from him looked up from whatever garbage heap they had been consigned to and
saw all the beauties of the world. the ears that were shattered and full of silence rang
suddenly with music. the mouth that had been hacked away from his face and now was
filled with dust returned to sing. because he had done it. he had accomplished the
impossible. he had spoken to them like god out of a cloud out of a thick cloud and now
he was floating on top of the cloud and he was a man again.
and the nurse …
he could imagine her running through the halls. he could hear her clattering like a
noisy ghost through the halls of death. he could feel her running from ward to ward from
the ward of the cripples to the ward of the deaf men to the ward of the blind men to the
ward of the voiceless men summoning all the people of the hospital screaming out to
them the news of the wonder that had happened. he could hear her voice as she told them
that up in a little room away from the rest of the hospital a lid had been lifted from a coffin
a stone had been rolled away from a tomb and a dead man was tapping and talking.
never before in the world had the dead spoken never since lazarus and lazarus didn't
say anything. now he would tell them everything. he would speak from the dead. he
would talk for the dead. he would tell all the secrets of the dead. and while he thought of
what he would tell them the nurse was running running running through wards and
corridors from floor to floor from basement to attic all through that great place from
which so many dead had gone. she was trumpeting through the hospital like the angel
gabriel telling them to come and to listen to the voice of the dead.
while he waited for all the people she had summoned to come to him he could feel
their presence as an actor must feel the presence of a thousand people in that moment before
the curtain goes up. he could feel the vibrations of their footsteps dozens of them as
they thronged into his room. he could feel his bed jostled back and forth as they pressed
against it in their eagerness. the springs of his bed seemed to send up a constant low hum
as his guests shifted for positions to get a better view of the dead man who was speaking.
the temperature of the room became so much warmer that he could almost feel the heat
of their massed bodies against the skin of his neck and the half of his forehead that was
naked above the mask.
then the door opened. he felt the vibration of a footstep a light one the nurse's
footstep. he strained to feel the rest. then came the vibrations of another footstep this
one heavier belonging to a man. he waited for the rest he waited for the hum of his
bedsprings. but everything was quiet. everything was still. there was no one in the room
for the great thing that was about to happen except him and his nurse and this heavyfooted
stranger. no one at all but the three of them. he felt an odd pang of disappointment
that they should consider such a great event so lightly. and then he remembered
the thing that was even more important than crowds. he lay there stiff quiet more
like a dead man than he had ever been before. he lay there waiting to receive his
response.
a finger came out of the darkness a finger, so enormous that it shattered against his
forehead like the crash of a pile driver. it echoed inside his brain like thunder in a cave.
the finger began to tap …
.-- …. .- - -.. --- -.-- --- ..- .-- .-.- -. -
w h a t d o y o u w a n t
what do you want?
chapter 19
when he made out the question when he was sure he had translated it right he grew very
quiet for a moment. it was like sitting in a silent room waiting for someone very important
someone for whom you have been waiting a long while and then suddenly
hearing a knock on the door. for just a minute you hesitate wondering who it might be
and what does he want and why did he come. for just a second you're scared because
although you've waited for years you really never expected the knock. then you get up
and go over and open the door just a little at first to prepare yourself for the shock of
disappointment at discovering it isn't the person you've been wanting. but when you find
that the impossible has happened that the visitor you've been praying for has arrived
you're so relieved and surprised you don't know exactly what to say or how to begin it.
what did he want?
it was as if someone who longed for the sea and a ship were suddenly given his ship
and then asked where he wanted to go. he hadn't ever really expected the ship so he had
spent all his time wishing for it and no time figuring out what to do with it after he got it.
he was the same way. he had never really expected to break through it had been so long
and he'd had such trouble trying to make them understand. the whole thing had been just
an idea it had been something to hope for and work for and the more difficult it got the
more important it became until in the end it was driving him almost crazy. but up to an
hour ago he had never imagined himself in the position of actually breaking through.
now he had accomplished it. the thing was done and they were asking him what he
wanted. and even though all that was left of his life seemed to depend on answering them
he couldn't organize his thoughts enough to make sense to himself much less to anyone
else.
then he thought about it in another way. maybe it wasn't so much a question of what
he wanted as what they could give him. that was it. and what could they give him? he
began to resent the question itself and the way they asked it and the ignorance that lay
behind it. who did they think they were and what did they think he wanted that they
could give him? did they think he would ask for an ice cream cone?
did they think he would ask for a good book and an open fire and a cat purring? did
they think he would ask to go to a movie and after that to a soda parlor for a nice cool
drink of lemonade? did they think he would ask for dancing lessons or a pair of
binoculars or a course in piano lessons imagine how surprised your friends will be?
maybe they thought he wanted a new suit or a silk shirt. maybe they expected him to
complain that the bed was a little hard and please bring me a glass of water. maybe they
thought he would ask for a change of diet. the coffee you've been pouring into my tube
lately needs a little more sugar it tastes bitter to my intestines so add half a teaspoonful of
sugar and stir it well please. the hash is too wet and it needs some seasoning. i think i
would like some fudge. next time you shove grub through that tube stick in a piece of
fudge not sugary not too strong of chocolate but smooth and a little warm i've been
waiting all these years and tapping all these months because i love fudge so much.
they should know what he wanted the silly bastards and they should know they
couldn't give it to him. he wanted the things they took for granted the things nobody
could ever give him. he wanted eyes to see with. two eyes to see sunlight and moonlight
and blue mountains and tall trees and little ants and houses that people live in and flowers
opening in the morning and snow on the ground and streams running and trains coming
and going and people walking and a puppy dog playing with an old shoe worrying it and
growling at it and backing away from it and frowning and wiggling its bottom and taking
the shoe very seriously. he wanted a nose so that he could smell rain and burning wood
and cooking food and the faint perfume that stays in the air after a girl has passed by. he
wanted a mouth so he could eat and talk and laugh and taste and kiss. he wanted arms
and legs so he could work and walk and be like a man like a living thing.
what did he want what was there for him to want what was there left that anybody
could give him?
it came over him rushing and howling like a torrent of water from behind a dam that
has broken. he wanted to get out. he could feel his heart speed up and his flesh tighten at
the thought. he wanted to get out. he wanted to get out so that he could feel the taste of
fresh air against his skin and imagine even though he couldn't smell that it came from the
sea or the mountains or the cities or the farmlands. he wanted to get out so that he could
feel people around him. it didn't matter that he couldn't see them or hear them or talk with
them. if he were out he would know that at least he was among them that he was not shut
up in a room away from them. it wasn't right that a man should be shut up in a room. it
wasn't right that he should be a prisoner forever. a man needed to be among other men.
every living thing needed to be among its own kind. he was a man a part of mankind and
he wanted to be taken out so that he could sense other men around him.
let me out he thought that's all i want. i've been lying here for years and years in a
room in a bed in a little covering of skin. now i want out. i've got to get out. you can't
keep a man here like this. he's got to be doing something in order to be sure he's still
alive. i'm like a prisoner here and you've got no right to keep me because i've done no
wrong. one room one bed like in a jail like in an asylum like in a grave with six feet of
earth above. you don't realize how a man can stand only so much of this without going
crazy. i'm suffocating and i can't suffocate any longer i can't stand it. if i had arms i could
move i could push i could widen the walls i could throw back the covers i could get into
a bigger place. if i had a voice i could yell and holler for help i could talk to myself and
be some company to myself. if i had legs i could run i could get away i could come out
into the open where there is air where there is room where i'm not in a hole and
smothering. but i haven't got any of these things i can't do any of these things so you
must help me. you must help me quick because inside i'm going crazy i'm going insane
i'm suffering like you'll never know. inside me i scream and howl and push and fight for
room for air for escape from the smothering. so let me out where i can feel air and sense
people. please let me out so i can have room to breathe in. let me out of here and take
me back into the world.
he was about to tap to them in a flood of dots and dashes when it came over him that
there might be difficulties. after all he wasn't an ordinary guy to be released from an
ordinary prison to lead an ordinary life. he was a very unusual case. all his life no matter
where he was there would have to be people taking care of him. that meant money and
he didn't have any money and so he would be a burden to people. the government or
whoever it was taking care of him probably didn't have any money to throw around
humoring a guy spending a fortune taking care of him just so he could feel air on the
outside and the presence of people around him. that might make sense to some people
but you could never get the government to understand it. the government would say he is
nuts who ever heard of a guy without arms legs eyes ears nose mouth getting any fun out
of being around people he can't see or hear or talk to? the government would say the
whole thing is a crazy idea and the hell with it he's better off where he is and besides it
costs too much dough.
and then he realized that he had it in his own power to make money plenty of it
enough to pay his own expenses and the expenses of the people who took care of him too.
instead of being a burden and a bother to the government he could even make money for
them. people were always willing to pay to see a curiosity they were always interested in
terrible sights and probably nowhere on the face of the earth was there any living thing
quite so terrible as he was. once he saw an exhibition of a man who was turning to stone.
you could tap a coin against his arm and it sounded as if you were tapping it against
marble the coin would ring so. that was terrible enough but not nearly so terrible as he
was. yet that man turning to stone was paying his own way and making enough money to
pay somebody to take care of him to boot. he could do the same thing. if they would only
let him out he would be able to take care of everything.
he would be doing good too in a roundabout way. he would be an educational
exhibit. people wouldn't learn much about anatomy from him but they would learn all
there was to know about war. that would be a great thing to concentrate war in one
stump of a body and to show it to people so they could see the difference between a war
that's in newspaper headlines and liberty loan drives and a war that is fought out
lonesomely in the mud somewhere a war between a man and a high explosive' shell.
suddenly he took fire with the idea he got so excited over it he forgot about his longing
for air and people this new idea was so wonderful. he would make an exhibit of himself
to show all the little guys what would happen to them and while he was doing it he would
be self-supporting and free. he would do a favor to everybody including himself. he
would show himself to the little guys and to their mothers and fathers and brothers and
sisters and wives and sweethearts and grandmothers and grandfathers and he would have
a sign over himself and the sign would say here is war and he would concentrate the
whole war into such a small piece of meat and bone and hair that they would never forget
it as long as they lived.
he began to tap that he wanted out. his mind ran way ahead of his tapping but he
kept on tapping just the same. what did he want? he'd tell them what he wanted the goddam
fools. he'd tell them he'd tap it out to them word by word he'd remember every bit of
it and put it down in dots and dashes and then they would know. as he tapped he thought
faster. he grew angrier and more excited and he tapped faster and faster trying to keep up
with the words that were pounding on the inside of his mind the words he could finally
use all the words he had thought of in all the years he had lain silent for he was talking
now for the first time he had learned how and he was talking to someone outside.
let me out he tapped let me out of here let me out. i won't give you any trouble. i
won't be any care. i can earn my keep. i can do a job like anybody else. take off my
nightshirt and build a glass case for me and take me down to the places where people are
having fun where they are on the lookout for freakish things. take me in my glass case to
the beaches and the country fairs and the church bazaars and the circuses and the
travelling carnivals.
you could do a wonderful business with me i could pay you for the trouble. you
could give them a good spiel. they've heard of the half-man half-woman. they've heard
of the bearded woman and the thin man and the midget. they've seen the human
mermaids and the wild men from borneo and the meat-eating girl from the congo throw
her a fish and watch her snap for it. they've seen the man who writes with his toes and
the man who walks on his hands and the siamese twins and those little rows of unborn
babies pickled in alcohol.
but they've seen nothing like this. this will be the god-damndest dime's worth a man
ever had. this will be a sensation in the show world and whoever sponsors my tour will
be a new barnum and have fine notices in all the newspapers because i am something
you can really holler about. i am something you can push with a money back guarantee. i
am the dead-man-who-is-alive. i am the live-man-who-is-dead. if they won't come into
our tent with that build-up then i am something more. i'm the man who made the world
safe for democracy. if they won't fall for that then for christ sake they're no men. let
them join the army because the army makes men.
take me along country roads and stop by every farmhouse and every field and ring a
dinner gong so that the farmers and their wives and their children and their hired men and
women can see me. say to the farmers here is something i'll bet you haven't seen before.
here is something you can't plow under. here is something that will never grow and
flower. the manure you plow into your fields is filthy enough but here is something less
than manure because it won't die and decay and nourish even a weed. here is something
so terrible that if it were born to a mare or a heifer or a sow or a ewe you would kill it on
the spot but you can't kill this because it is a human being. it has a brain. it is thinking all
the time. believe it or not this thing thinks and it is alive and it goes against every rule of
nature although nature doesn't make it so. you know what made it so. look at it medals
real medals probably of solid gold. lift up the top of the case and you'll know what made
it so. it stinks of glory.
take me into the places where men work and make things. take me there and say
boys here is a cheap way to get by. maybe times are bad and your salaries are low. don't
worry boys because there is always a way to cure things like that. have a war and then
prices go up and wages go up and everybody makes a hell of a lot of money. there'll be
one along pretty soon boys so don't get impatient. it'll come and then you'll have your
chance.
either way you win. if you don't have to fight why you stay at home and make
sixteen bucks a day working in the shipyards. and if they draft you why you've got a
good chance of coming back without so many needs. maybe you'll need only one shoe
instead of two that's saving money. maybe you'll be blind and if you are why then you
never need worry about the expense of glasses. maybe you'll be lucky like me. look at
me close boys i don't need anything. a little broth or something three times a day and
that's all. no shoes no socks no underwear no shirt no gloves no hat no necktie no collarbuttons
no vest no coat no movies no vaudeville no football not even a shave. look at me
boys i have no expenses at all. you're suckers boys. get on the gravy train. i know what
i'm talking about, i used to need all the things that you need right now. i used to be a consumer.
i've consumed a lot in my time. i've consumed more shrapnel and gunpowder than
any living man. so don't get blue boys because you'll have your chance there'll be another
war along pretty soon and then maybe you'll be lucky like me.
take me into the schoolhouses all the schoolhouses in the world. suffer little
children to come unto me isn't that right? they may scream at first and have nightmares
at night but they'll get used to it because they've got to get used to it and it's best to start
them young. gather them around my case and say here little girl here little boy come and
take a look at your daddy. come and look at yourself. you'll be like that when you grow
up to be great big strong men and women. you'll have a chance to die for your country.
and you may not die you may come back like this. not everybody dies little kiddies.
closer please. you over there against the blackboard what's the matter with you?
quit crying you silly little girl come over here and look at the nice man the nice man who
was a soldier boy. you remember him don't you? don't you remember little crybaby how
you waved flags and saved tinfoil and put your savings in thrift stamps? of course you do
you silly. well here's the soldier you did it for.
come on youngsters take a nice look and then we'll go into our nursery rhymes. new
nursery rhymes for new times. hickory dickory dock my daddy's nuts from shellshock.
humpty dumpty thought he was wise till gas came along and burned out his eyes. a dillar
a dollar a ten o'clock scholar blow off his legs and then watch him holler. rocka-bye
baby in the treetop don't stop a bomb or you'll probably flop. now i lay me down to sleep
my bombproof cellar's good and deep but if i'm killed before i wake remember god it's
for your sake amen.
take me into the colleges and universities and academies and convents. call the girls
together all the healthy beautiful young girls. point down to me and say here girls is your
father. here is that boy who was strong last night. here is your little son your baby son
the fruit of your love the hope of your future. look down on him girls so you won't forget
him. see that red gash there with mucus hanging to it? that was his face girls. here girls
touch it don't be afraid. bend down and kiss it. you'll have to wipe your lips afterward
because they will have a strange rotten stuff on them but that's all right because a lover is
a lover and here is your lover.
call all the young men together and say here is your brother here is your best friend
here you are young men. this is a very interesting case young men because we know
there is a mind buried down there. technically this thing is living meat like that tissue we
kept alive all last summer in the lab. but this is a different cut of meat because it also
contains a brain. now listen to me closely young gentlemen. that brain is thinking.
maybe it's thinking about music. maybe it has a great symphony all thought out or a
mathematical formula that would change the world or a book that would make people
kinder or the germ of an idea that would save a hundred million people from cancer. this
is a very interesting problem young gentlemen because if this brain does hold such
secrets how in the world are we ever going to find out? in any event there you are young
gentlemen breathing and thinking and dead like a frog under chloroform with its stomach
laid open so that its heartbeat may be seen so quiet so helpless but yet alive. there is your
future and your sweet wild dreams there is the thing your sweethearts loved and there is
the thing your leaders urged it to be. think well young gentlemen. think sharply young
gentlemen and then we will go back to our studies of the barbarians who sacked rome.
take me wherever there are parliaments and diets and congresses and chambers of
statesmen. i want to be there when they talk about honor and justice and making the
world safe for democracy and fourteen points and the self determination of peoples. i
want to be there to remind them i haven't got a tongue to stick into the cheek i haven't got
either. but the statesmen have tongues. the statesmen have cheek. put my glass case
upon the speaker's desk and every time the gavel descends let me feel its vibration
through my little jewel case. then let them speak of trade policies and embargoes and
new colonies and old grudges. let them debate the menace of the yellow race and the
white man's burden and the course of empire and why should we take all this crap off
germany or whoever the next germany is. let them talk about the south american
market and why so-and-so is beating us out of it and why our merchant marine can't
compete and oh what the hell let's send a good stiff note. let them talk more munitions
and airplanes and battleships and tanks and gases why of course we've got to have them
we can't get along without them how in the world could we protect the peace if we didn't
have them? let them form blocs and alliances and mutual assistance pacts and guarantees
of neutrality. let them draft notes and ultimatums and protests and accusations.
but before they vote on them before they give the order for all the little guys to start
killing each other let the main guy rap his gavel on my case and point down at me and
say here gentlemen is the only issue before this house and that is are you for this thing
here or are you against it. and if they are against it why goddam them let them stand up
like men and vote. and if they are for it let them be hanged and drawn and quartered and
paraded through the streets in small chopped up little bits and thrown out into the fields
where no clean animal will touch them and let their chunks rot there and may no green
thing ever grow where they rot. take me into your churches your great towering cathedrals
that have to be rebuilt every fifty years because they are destroyed by war. carry me
in my glass box down the aisles where kings and priests and brides and children at their
confirmation have gone so many times before to kiss a splinter of wood from a true cross
on which was nailed the body of a man who was lucky enough to die. set me high on
your altars and call on god to look down upon his murderous little children his dearly
beloved little children. wave over me the incense i can't smell. swill down the sacramental
wine i can't taste. drone out the prayers i can't hear. go through the old holy
gestures for which i have no legs and no arms. chorus out the hallelujas i can't sing.
bring them out loud and strong for me your hallelujas all of them for me because i know
the truth and you don't you fools. you fools you fools you fools…
chapter 20
he felt the vibrations of heavy feet leaving the room. the man who had come in and
tapped the question and who had stood listening to his reply for how long he couldn't
imagine had gone. he was alone with the nurse again. he was left alone to wonder.
he began to have misgivings. just as he had always suspected himself of some
mistake in his count of time so now he felt wild little ripples of fear shudder through his
flesh. he had been so eager to tap that perhaps his message hadn't made sense. perhaps he
had made a mistake in remembering the code so that his words came out as a jumble of
letters with no meaning. his thoughts had rushed through his head so tumultuously that
perhaps he hadn't got them down in order clearly and sanely. perhaps ten thousand other
possibilities had come between him and the message he was bleeding inside to give them.
or perhaps the man had just gone away to talk to his superior and would soon return with
an answer.
that was it. oh please god that must be it he was sure of it. the man would return
soon with an answer. all he had to do was to lie back and rest he was so tired. it seemed
to him that he was lying in some kind of dream coma like a man who has spent all his
emotions in one wild drunk and afterward is simply sick and disgusted and sure of the
worst. he had been tapping now for weeks months maybe years he couldn't tell because
the tapping had taken the place of time for him and all his energies had gone into it all his
energies and all his hopes and all his life.
he stiffened.
the vibrations were coming toward him again. the man was returning with an
answer. great merciful god thank you here it is here it is my answer. here is my triumph
here is my return from the dead here is life vibrating against the floor singing in my
bedsprings singing like all the angels in heaven.
a finger began to tap against his forehead.
w h a t y o u a s k i s a g a i n s t r e g u l a t i o n s
w h o a r e y o u
the tapping went on against his forehead but he paid no more attention to it.
everything in his mind went suddenly blank hollow completely quiet. a moment of this
and then he began to think about the message to make certain there was no mistake that it
meant exactly what it said. and he knew it did.
he could almost hear the wail of pain that went up from his heart. it was a sharp
terrible personal pain the kind of pain that comes only when someone to whom you have
never done any harm turns on you and says goodbye goodbye forever without any reason
for doing it. without any reason at all.
he had done nothing to them. he wasn't to blame for the trouble he was causing yet
they were drawing the curtain around him stuffing him back into the womb back into the
grave saying to him goodbye don't bother us don't come back to life the dead should stay
dead and we are done with you.
but why?
he had hurt no one. he had tried to give them as little trouble as possible. he was a
great care that was true but he hadn't intentionally become so. he wasn't a thief or a
drunkard or a liar or a murderer. he was a man a guy no worse no better than anybody
else. he was just a guy who'd had to go to war who'd been bad hurt and now was trying
to get out from his prison to feel fresh cool air on his skin to sense the color and
movement of people around him. that was all he wanted. and to him who had harmed
nobody they were saying goodnight goodbye stay where you are don't give us any trouble
you are beyond life you are beyond death you are even beyond hope you are gone you are
finished forever goodnight and goodbye.
in one terrible moment he saw the whole thing. they wanted only to forget him. he
was upon their conscience so they had abandoned him they had forsaken him. they were
the only people in the world who could help him. they were his last court of appeal. he
might rage and storm and howl against their verdict but it would do him no good. they
had decided. nothing could change them. he was completely at their mercy and they had
no mercy. for him there was no hope. he might just as well come face to face with the
truth.
every moment of his life since he had awakened into the darkness and dumbness and
terror every moment of it had been concentrated upon the time some day some year when
he would break through to them. now he had done it. he had broken through and they
had refused him. before even in his most terrible moments there had been a vague hope
that kept him going. it had prevented him from going stark raving crazy it had shined like
a glow in the distance toward which he never stopped moving. now the glow was gone
and there was nothing left. there was no reason for him to fool himself about it any
longer. these people didn't want him. darkness desertion loneliness silence horror unending
horror—these were his life from now on without a single ray of hope to lighten
his sufferings. they were his whole future. it was for them that his mother had borne him.
curse her curse the world curse the sunlight curse god curse every decent thing on earth.
god damn them god damn them and torture them as he was being tortured. god give
them darkness and silence and dumbness and helplessness and horror and fear the great
towering terrible fear that was with him now the desolation and the loneliness that would
be with him forever. no.
no no no.
he wouldn't let them do it.
it was impossible for one human being to do this to another. no one could be so
cruel. they didn't understand that was all he hadn't made it plain enough to them. he
couldn't give up now he must go on and on until they understood because they were good
people they were good kindly people and they needed only to understand. he began to
tap again.
he began to tap again and to tell them pleadingly haltingly humbly that please he
wanted out. he wanted to feel air against him the fresh clean air outside a hospital. please
understand. he wanted the feel of people of his own kind free and happy. there really
wasn't any good reason except that. the thing about showing him in a case forget that it
was just a way to raise money and make it easier on them. only that. he was lonesome.
that was all just lonesome. there were no more reasons he could give them. there was
nothing he could do except to try to let them know that inside the skin that covered his
body there was so much terror so much loneliness that it was only right they should
permit him such a small thing as the freedom he could pay for.
as he tapped he felt the nurse's hand against his forehead stroking him soothing him.
he thought to himself i wish i could see her face. it must be a beautiful face she has such
beautiful hands. then against the stump of his left arm he felt 3 sudden wet coolness. the
man who had tapped his answer was applying an alcoholic swab. oh god he thought i
know what that means don't do it please don't. then he felt the sharp deadly prick of the
needle. they were giving him dope again.
oh god he thought they won't even let me talk. they won't even listen to me any
more. all they want is to make a madman out of me so that whenever i tap my messages
to them they can say he's only crazy don't pay any attention to him poor fellow he's nuts.
that's what they're trying to do god they're trying to drive me crazy and i've fought so
hard i've been so strong that the only way they can do it is by giving me dope.
he felt himself sinking back back into the place where they wanted to thrust him. he
felt the tingle of his own flesh and he began to see the vision. he saw the yellow sand and
he saw the heat waves coming up from it. above the heat waves he saw christ in his
flowing robes and his crown of thorns with the blood dripping from them. he saw christ
quivering in the desert heat coming up from tucson. and far off in the distance he heard
a woman's voice crying my son my little boy my son . . .
in sheer terrible desperation he shut out the voice he pushed the vision away. not yet.
not yet. he wasn't through. he would talk to them he would keep on tapping. the muscles
of his body were turning to water but he would keep on tapping. he would not let
them lower the lid to his coffin. he would scream and claw and fight as any man should
do when they are burying him alive. in his last moment of consciousness in his last
moment of life he would still fight he would still tap. he would keep on and on and on
tapping all the while tapping when he was asleep tapping when he was doped tapping
when he was in pain tapping forever. they might not answer him they might ignore him
but at least they would never be able to forget that as long as he lived here was a man
who was talking to them talking to them all the time.
his taps came slower and slower and the vision swam toward him and he pushed it
away and it swam toward him again. the woman's voice faded in and out like something
that is carried on the wind. but still he tapped.
he was tapping why? why? why?
why didn't they want him? why were they shutting the lid of the coffin against him?
why didn't they want him to speak? why didn't they want him to be seen? why didn't
they want him to be free? it was five maybe six years now since he had been blown out
of the world. the war must be over by now. no war could last that long killing so many
people there weren't enough people to kill. if the war was over then all the dead had been
buried and all the prisoners had been released. why shouldn't he be released too? why
not unless they figured him as one of the dead and if that was true why didn't they kill
him why didn't they put a stop to his suffering? why should he be a prisoner? he had
committed no crime. what right had they to keep him? what possible reason could they
have to be so inhuman to him?
why? why? why?
and then suddenly he saw. he had a vision of himself as a new kind of christ as a
man who carries within himself all the seeds of a new order of things. he was the new
messiah of the battlefields saying to people as i am so shall you be. for he had seen the
future he had tasted it and now he was living it. he had seen the airplanes flying in the
sky he had seen the skies of the future filled with them black with them and now he saw
the horror beneath. he saw a world of lovers forever parted of dreams never consummated
of plans that never turned into reality. he saw.a world of dead fathers and crippled
brothers and crazy screaming sons. he saw a world of armless mothers clasping headless
babies to their breasts trying to scream out their grief from throats that were cancerous
with gas. he saw starved cities black and cold and motionless and the only things in this
whole dead terrible world that made a move or a sound were the airplanes that blackened
the sky and far off against the horizon the thunder of the big guns and the puffs that rose
from barren tortured earth when their shells exploded.
that was it he had it he understood it now he had told them his secret and in denying
him they had told him theirs.
he was the future he was a perfect picture of the future and they were afraid to let
anyone see what the future was like. already they were looking ahead they were figuring
the future and somewhere in the future they saw war. to fight that war they would need
men and if men saw the future they wouldn't fight. so they were masking the future they
were keeping the future a soft quiet deadly secret. they knew that if all the little people
all the little guys saw the future they would begin to ask questions. they would ask
questions and they would find answers and they would say to the guys who wanted them
to fight they would say you lying thieving sons-of-bitches we won't fight we won't be
dead we will live we are the world we are the future and we will not let you butcher us no
matter what you say no matter what speeches you make no matter what slogans you
write. remember it well we we we are the world we are what makes it go round we make
bread and cloth and guns we are the hub of the wheel and the spokes and the wheel itself
without us you would be hungry naked worms and we will not die. we are immortal we
are the sources of life we are the lowly despicable ugly people we are the great wonderful
beautiful people of the world and we are sick of it we are utterly weary we are done with
it forever and ever because we are the living and we will not be destroyed.
if you make a war if there are guns to be aimed if there are bullets to be fired if there
are men to be killed they will not be us. they will not be us the guys who grow wheat
and turn it into food the guys who make clothes and paper and houses and tiles the guys
who build dams and power plants and string the long moaning high tension wires the
guys who crack crude oil down into a dozen different parts who make light globes and
sewing machines and shovels and automobiles and airplanes and tanks and guns oh no it
will not be us who die. it will be you.
it will be you—you who urge us on to battle you who incite us against ourselves you
who would have one cobbler kill another cobbler you who would have one man who
works kill another man who works you who would have one human being who wants
only to live kill another human being who wants only to live. remember this. remember
this well you people who plan for war. remember this you patriots you fierce ones you
spawners of hate you inventors of slogans. remember this as you have never remembered
anything else in your lives.
we are men of peace we are men who work and we want no quarrel. but if you
destroy our peace if you take away our work if you try to range us one against the other
we will know what to do. if you tell us to make the world safe for democracy we will
take you seriously and by god and by christ we will make it so. we will use the guns you
force upon us we will use them to defend our very lives and the menace to our lives does
not lie on the other side of a nomansland that was set apart without our consent it lies
within our own boundaries here and now we have seen it and we know it.
put the guns into our hands and we will use them. give us the slogans and we will
turn them into realities. sing the battle hymns and we will take them up where you left
off. not one not ten not ten thousand not a million not ten millions not a hundred millions
but a billion two billions of us all the people of the world we will have the slogans and
we will have the hymns and we will have the guns and we will use them and we will live.
make no mistake of it we will live. we will be alive and we will walk and talk and eat
and sing and laugh and feel and love and bear our children in tranquillity in security in
decency in peace. you plan the wars you masters of men plan the wars and point the way
and we will point the gun.
-endabout
the author:
dalton trumbo was born in montrose, colorado, in 1905 and attended the university of colorado and the
university of california at los angeles. among his novels are eclipse, washington jitters and the
remarkable andrew (also a motion picture). his motion picture scripts include a man to remember, kitty
foyle, a guy named joe, thirty seconds over tokyo, the brave one (academy award, 1957), spartacus,
exodus and lonely are the brave. he is a contributor to such magazines as the saturday evening post,
mccalls, playboy, the nation and others. he lives in los angeles.