


Antonio
Although the play's title refers to him, Antonio is a
rather lackluster character. He emerges in Act I, scene i as a hopeless
depressive, someone who cannot name the source of his melancholy
and who, throughout the course of the play, devolves into a self-pitying
lump, unable to muster the energy required to defend himself against
execution. Antonio never names the cause of his melancholy, but
the evidence seems to point to his being in love, despite his denial
of this idea in Act I, scene i. The most likely object of his affection
is Bassanio, who takes full advantage of the merchant's boundless
feelings for him. Antonio has risked the entirety of his fortune
on overseas trading ventures, yet he agrees to guarantee the potentially
lethal loan Bassanio secures from Shylock. In the context of his
unrequited and presumably unconsummated relationship with Bassanio,
Antonio's willingness to offer up a pound of his own flesh seems
particularly important, signifying a union that grotesquely alludes
to the rites of marriage, where two partners become "one flesh."
Further evidence of the nature of Antonio's feelings for
Bassanio appears later in the play, when Antonio's proclamations
resonate with the hyperbole and self-satisfaction of a doomed lover's
declaration: "Pray God Bassanio come / To see me pay his debt, and
then I care not" (III.iii.35-36).
Antonio ends the play as happily as he can, restored to wealth even
if not delivered into love. Without a mate, he is indeed the "tainted
wether"--or castrated ram--of the flock, and he will likely return
to his favorite pastime of moping about the streets of Venice (IV.i.113).
After all, he has effectively disabled himself from pursuing his
other hobby--abusing Shylock--by insisting that the Jew convert to
Christianity. Although a sixteenth-century audience might have seen
this demand as merciful, as Shylock is saving himself from eternal
damnation by converting, we are less likely to be convinced. Not
only does Antonio's reputation as an anti-Semite precede him, but
the only instance in the play when he breaks out of his doldrums
is his "storm" against Shylock (I.iii.132).
In this context, Antonio proves that the dominant threads of his
character are melancholy and cruelty.
