


Benedick 
Benedick is the willful lord, recently returned from fighting
in the wars, who vows that he will never marry. He engages with
Beatrice in a competition to outwit, outsmart, and out-insult the
other, but to his observant friends, he seems to feel some deeper
emotion below the surface. Upon hearing Claudio and Don Pedro discussing
Beatrice's desire for him, Benedick vows to be "horribly in love
with her," in effect continuing the competition by outdoing her
in love and courtship (II.iii.207). Benedick
is one of the most histrionic characters in the play, as he constantly
performs for the benefit of others. He is the entertainer, indulging
in witty hyperbole to express his feelings. He delivers a perfect
example of his inflated rhetoric when Beatrice enters during the
masked ball. Turning to his companions, Benedick grossly exaggerates
how Beatrice has misused him, bidding his friends to send him to
the farthest corners of the earth rather than let him spend one
more minute with his nemesis: "Will your grace command me any service
to the world's end? I will go on the slightest errand now to the
Antipodes that you can devise to send me on. I will fetch you a
toothpicker from the furthest inch of Asia . . . do you any embassage
to the pigmies, rather than hold three words' conference with this
harpy" (II.i.229-235).
Of course, since Benedick is so invested in performing
for the others, it is not easy for us to tell whether he has been
in love with Beatrice all along or falls in love with her suddenly
during the play. Benedick's adamant refusal to marry does appear
to change over the course of the play, once he decides to fall in
love with Beatrice. He attempts to conceal this transformation from
his friends but really might enjoy shocking them by shaving off
his beard and professing undying love to Beatrice. This change in
attitude seems most evident when Benedick challenges Claudio, previously
his closest friend in the world, to duel to the death over Claudio's
accusation as to Hero's unchaste behavior. There can be no doubt
at this point that Benedick has switched his allegiances entirely
over to Beatrice.
