rebecca
daphne du maurier
first published in great britain 1938

chapter one
last night i dreamt i went to manderley again. it seemed to me i stood
by the iron gate leading to the drive, and for a while i could not enter,
for the way was barred to me. there was a padlock and chain upon the
gate. i called in my dream to the lodge-keeper, and had no answer, and
peering closer through the rusted spokes of the gate i saw that the lodge
was uninhabited.
no smoke came from the chimney, and the little lattice windows gaped
forlorn. then, like all dreamers, i was possessed of a sudden with
supernatural powers and passed like a spirit through the barrier before
me. the drive wound away in front of me, twisting and turning as it had
always done, but as i advanced i was aware that a change had come upon
it; it was narrow and unkempt, not the drive that we had known. at first
i was puzzled and did not understand, and it was only when i bent my head
to avoid the low swinging branch of a tree that i realized what had happened.
nature had come into her own again and, little by little, in her stealthy,
insidious way had encroached upon the drive with long, tenacious fingers.
the woods, always a menace even in the past, had triumphed in the end.
they crowded, dark and uncontrolled, to the borders of the drive. the
beeches with white, naked limbs leant close to one another, their branches
intermingled in a strange embrace, making a vault above my head like the
archway of a church. and there were other trees as well, trees that i
did not recognize, squat oaks and tortured elms that straggled cheek by
jowl with the beeches, and had thrust themselves out of the quiet earth,
along with monster shrubs and plants, none of which i remembered.
the drive was a ribbon now, a thread of its former self, with gravel surface
gone, and choked with grass and moss. the trees had thrown out low branches,
making an impediment to progress; the gnarled roots looked like skeleton
claws. scattered here and again amongst this jungle growth i would
recognize shrubs that had been landmarks in our time, things of culture
and grace, hydrangeas whose blue heads had been famous. no hand had checked 
their progress, and they had gone native now, rearing to monster height
without a bloom, black and ugly as the nameless parasites that grew beside
them.
on and on, now east now west, wound the poor thread that once had been
our drive. sometimes i thought it lost, but it appeared again, beneath
a fallen tree perhaps, or struggling on the other side of a muddied ditch
created by the winter rains. i had not thought the way so long. surely
the miles had multiplied, even as the trees had done, and this path led
but to a labyrinth, some choked wilderness, and not to the house at all.
i came upon it suddenly; the approach masked by the unnatural growth of
a vast shrub that spread in all directions, and i stood, my heart thumping
in my breast, the strange prick of tears behind my eyes.
there was manderley, our manderley, secretive and silent as it had always
been, the grey stone shining in the moonlight of my dream, the mullioned
windows reflecting the green lawns and the terrace. time could not wreck
the perfect symmetry of those walls, nor the site itself, a jewel in the
hollow of a hand.
the terrace sloped to the lawns, and the lawns stretched to the sea, and
turning i could see the sheet of silver placid under the moon, like a
lake undisturbed by wind or storm. no waves would come to ruffle this
dream water, and no bulk of cloud, wind-driven from the west, obscure
the clarity of this pale sky. i turned again to the house, and though
it stood inviolate, untouched, as though we ourselves had left but
yesterday, i saw that the garden had obeyed the jungle law, even as the
woods had done. the rhododendrons stood fifty feet high, twisted and
entwined with bracken, and they had entered into alien marriage with a
host of nameless shrubs, poor, bastard things that clung about their roots
as though conscious of their spurious origin. a lilac had mated with a
copper beech, and to bind them yet more closely to one another the
malevolent ivy, always an enemy to grace, had thrown her tendrils about
the pair and made them prisoners. ivy held prior place in this lost garden,
the long strands crept across the lawns, and soon would encroach upon
the house itself. there was another plant too, some half-breed from the
woods, whose seed had been scattered long ago beneath the trees and then
forgotten, and now, marching in unison with the ivy, thrust its ugly form
like a giant rhubarb towards the soft grass where the daffodils had blown.
nettles were everywhere, the vanguard of the army. they choked the terrace,
they sprawled about the paths, they leant, vulgar and lanky, against the
very windows of the house. they made indifferent sentinels, for in many
places their ranks had been broken by the rhubarb plant, and they lay
with crumpled heads and listless stems, making a pathway for the rabbits.
i left the drive and went on to the terrace, for the nettles were no barrier
to me, a dreamer. i walked enchanted, and nothing held me back.
moonlight can play odd tricks upon the fancy, even upon a dreamer's fancy. 
as i stood there, hushed and still, i could swear that the house was not
an empty shell but lived and breathed as it had lived before.
light came from the windows, the curtains blew softly in the night air,
and there, in the library, the door would stand half open as we had left
it, with my handkerchief on the table beside the bowl of autumn roses.
the room would bear witness to our presence. the little heap of library
books marked ready to return, and the discarded copy of the times. ashtrays,
with the stub of a cigarette; cushions, with the imprint of our heads
upon them, lolling in the chairs; the charred embers of our log fire still
smouldering against the morning. and jasper, dear jasper, with his soulful
eyes and great, sagging jowl, would be stretched upon the floor, his tail
a-thump when he heard his master's footsteps.
a cloud, hitherto unseen, came upon the moon, and hovered an instant like
a dark hand before a face. the illusion went with it, and the lights in
the windows were extinguished. i looked upon a desolate shell, soulless
at last, unhaunted, with no whisper of the past about its staring walls.
the house was a sepulchre, our fear and suffering lay buried in the ruins.
there would be no resurrection. when i thought of manderley in my waking
hours i would not be bitter. i should think of it as it might have been,
could i have lived there without fear. i should remember the rose-garden
in summer, and the birds that sang at dawn. tea under the chestnut tree,
and the murmur of the sea coming up to us from the lawns below. i would
think of the blown lilac, and the happy valley. these things were permanent,
they could not be dissolved. they were memories that cannot hurt. all
this i resolved in my dream, while the clouds lay across the face of the
moon, for like most sleepers i knew that i dreamed. in reality i lay many
hundred miles away in an alien land, and would wake, before many seconds
had passed, in the bare little hotel bedroom, comforting in its very lack
of atmosphere. i would sigh a moment, stretch myself and turn, and opening
my eyes, be bewildered at that glittering sun, that hard, clean sky, so
different from the soft moonlight of my dream. the day would lie before
us both, long no doubt, and uneventful, but fraught with a certain
stillness, a dear tranquillity we had not known before. we would not talk
of manderley, i would not tell my dream. for manderley was ours no longer.
manderley was no more.
chapter two
we can never go back again, that much is certain. the past is still too
close to us. the things we have tried to forget and put behind us would
stir again, and that sense of fear, of furtive unrest, struggling at length
to blind unreasoning panic - now mercifully stilled, thank god - might
in some manner unforeseen become a living companion, as it had been before.
he is wonderfully patient and never complains, not even when he 
remembers ... which happens, i think, rather more often than he would
have me know.
i can tell by the way he will look lost and puzzled suddenly, all expression
dying away from his dear face as though swept clean by an unseen hand,
and in its place a mask will form, a sculptured thing, formal and cold,
beautiful still but lifeless. he will fall to smoking cigarette after
cigarette, not bothering to extinguish them, and the glowing stubs will
lie around on the ground like petals. he will talk quickly and eagerly
about nothing at all, snatching at any subject as a panacea to pain. i
believe there is a theory that men and women emerge finer and stronger
after suffering, and that to advance in this or any world we must endure
ordeal by fire. this we have done in full measure, ironic though it seems.
we have both known fear, and. loneliness, and very great distress. i
suppose sooner or later in the life of everyone comes a moment of trial.
we all of us have our particular devil who rides us and torments us, and
we must give battle in the end. we have conquered ours, or so we believe.
the devil does not ride us any more. we have come through our crisis,
not unscathed of course. his premonition of disaster was correct from
the beginning; and like a ranting actress in an indifferent play, i might
say that we have paid for freedom. but i have had enough melodrama in
this life, and would willingly give my five senses if they could ensure
us our present peace and security. happiness is not a possession to be
prized, it is ยง quality of thought, a state of mind. of course we have
our moments of depression; but there are other moments too, when time,
unmeasured by the clock, runs on into eternity and, catching his smile,
i know we are together, we march in unison, no clash of thought or of
opinion makes a barrier between us.
we have no secrets now from one another. all things are shared. granted
that our little hotel is dull, and the food indifferent, and that day
after day dawns very much the same, yet we would not have it otherwise.
we should meet too many of the people he knows in any of the big hotels.
we both appreciate simplicity, and we are sometimes bored - well, boredom
is a pleasing antidote to fear. we live very much by routine, and i -
i have developed a genius for reading aloud. the only time i have known
him show impatience is when the postman lags, for it means we must wait
another day before the arrival of our english mail. we have tried wireless,
but the noise is such an irritant, and we prefer to store up our excitement;
the result of a cricket match played many days ago means much to us.
oh, the test matches that have saved us from ennui, the boxing bouts,
even the billiard scores. finals of schoolboy sports, dog racing, strange
little competitions in the remoter counties, all these are grist to our
hungry mill. sometimes old copies of the field come my way, and i am
transported from this indifferent island to the realities of an english
spring. i read of chalk streams, of the mayfly, of sorrel growing in green 